Philosophers in antiquity used the concept of force in the study of stationary and moving objects and simple machines, but thinkers such as Aristotle and Archimedes retained fundamental errors in understanding force.
In part this was due to an incomplete understanding of the sometimes non-obvious force of friction, and a consequently inadequate view of the nature of natural motion.
A fundamental error was the belief that a force is required to maintain motion, even at a constant velocity.
Most of the previous misunderstandings about motion and force were eventually corrected by Galileo Galilei and Sir Isaac Newton.
With his mathematical insight, Sir Isaac Newton formulated laws of motion that were not improved-on for nearly three hundred years.
By the early 20th century, Einstein developed a theory of relativity that correctly predicted the action of forces on objects with increasing momenta near the speed of light, and also provided insight into the forces produced by gravitation and inertia.
With modern insights into quantum mechanics and technology that can accelerate particles close to the speed of light, particle physics has devised a Standard Model to describe forces between particles smaller than atoms.
The Standard Model predicts that exchanged particles called gauge bosons are the fundamental means by which forces are emitted and absorbed.
Only four main interactions are known: in order of decreasing strength, they are: strong, electromagnetic, weak, and gravitational.
:2–10:79 High-energy particle physics observations made during the 1970s and 1980s confirmed that the weak and electromagnetic forces are expressions of a more fundamental electroweak interaction.
One of the foundation concepts of physics, a force may be thought of as any influence which tends to change the motion of an object.
Our present understanding is that there are four fundamental forces in the universe, the gravity force, the nuclear weak force, the electromagnetic force, and the nuclear strong force in ascending order of strength.
In mechanics, forces are seen as the causes of linear motion, whereas the causes of rotational motion are called torques.
The action of forces in causing motion is described by Newton's Laws under ordinary conditions, although there are notable exceptions.
The shortcomings of Aristotelian physics would not be fully corrected until the 17th century work of Galileo Galilei, who was influenced by the late Medieval idea that objects in forced motion carried an innate force of impetus.
Galileo constructed an experiment in which stones and cannonballs were both rolled down an incline to disprove the Aristotelian theory of motion early in the 17th century.
He showed that the bodies were accelerated by gravity to an extent that was independent of their mass and argued that objects retain their velocity unless acted on by a force, for example friction.
Aristotle provided a philosophical discussion of the concept of a force as an integral part of Aristotelian cosmology.
In Aristotle's view, the terrestrial sphere contained four elements that come to rest at different "natural places" therein.
Aristotle believed that motionless objects on Earth, those composed mostly of the elements earth and water, to be in their natural place on the ground and that they will stay that way if left alone.
He distinguished between the innate tendency of objects to find their "natural place" (e.g.)
, for heavy bodies to fall), which led to "natural motion", and unnatural or forced motion, which required continued application of a force.
This theory, based on the everyday experience of how objects move, such as the constant application of a force needed to keep a cart moving, had conceptual trouble accounting for the behavior of projectiles, such as the flight of arrows.
The place where the archer moves the projectile was at the start of the flight, and while the projectile sailed through the air, no discernible efficient cause acts on it.
Aristotle was aware of this problem and proposed that the air displaced through the projectile's path carries the projectile to its target.
This explanation demands a continuum like air for change of place in general.
Forces are inherently vector quantities, requiring vector addition to combine them.
The SI unit for force is the Newton, which is defined by Newton = kg m/s2 as may be seen from Newton's second law.
The influences which cause changes in the motion of objects are forces and torques.
The effects of forces on objects are described by Newton's Laws.
A force may be defined as any influence which tends to change the motion of an object.
The relationship between force, mass, and acceleration is given by Newton's Second Law: Force is equal to mass into acceleration.
Newton's First Law states that an object will continue at rest or in motion in a straight line at constant velocity unless acted upon by an external force.
Newton's Third Law states that all forces in nature occur in pairs of forces which are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
A force is a vector quantity.
As learned in an earlier unit, a vector quantity is a quantity that has both magnitude and direction.
To fully describe the force acting upon an object, you must describe both the magnitude (size or numerical value) and the direction.
Thus, 10 Newton is not a full description of the force acting upon an object.
In contrast, 10 Newton, downward is a complete description of the force acting upon an object; both the magnitude (10 Newton) and the direction (downward) are given.
Because a force is a vector that has a direction, it is common to represent forces using diagrams in which a force is represented by an arrow.
Such vector diagrams were introduced in an earlier unit and are used throughout the study of physics.
The size of the arrow is reflective of the magnitude of the force and the direction of the arrow reveals the direction that the force is acting.
(Such diagrams are known as free-body diagrams and are discussed later in this lesson.
) Furthermore, because forces are vectors, the effect of an individual force upon an object is often canceled by the effect of another force.
For example, the effect of a 20-Newton upward force acting upon a book is canceled by the effect of a 20-Newton downward force acting upon the book.
In such instances, it is said that the two individual forces balance each other; there would be no unbalanced force acting upon the book.
Other situations could be imagined in which two of the individual vector forces cancel each other ("balance"), yet a third individual force exists that is not balanced by another force.
For example, imagine a book sliding across the rough surface of a table from left to right.
The downward force of gravity and the upward force of the table supporting the book act in opposite directions and thus balance each other.
However, the force of friction acts leftwards, and there is no rightward force to balance it.
In this case, an unbalanced force acts upon the book to change its state of motion.
Contact forces are those types of forces that result when the two interacting objects are perceived to be physically contacting each other.
Examples of contact forces include frictional forces, tensional forces, normal forces, air resistance forces, and applied forces.
These specific forces will be discussed in more detail later in Lesson 2 as well as in other lessons.
Example of contact forces are Frictional Force, Tension Force, Normal Force, Electrical Force, Magnetic Force, Air Resistance Force, Applied Force, Spring Force.
Action-at-a-distance forces are those types of forces that result even when the two interacting objects are not in physical contact with each other, yet are able to exert a push or pull despite their physical separation.
Examples of action-at-a-distance forces include gravitational forces.
For example, the sun and planets exert a gravitational pull on each other despite their large spatial separation.
Even when your feet leave the earth and you are no longer in physical contact with the earth, there is a gravitational pull between you and the Earth.
Electric forces are action-at-a-distance forces.
For example, the protons in the nucleus of an atom and the electrons outside the nucleus experience an electrical pull towards each other despite their small spatial separation.
And magnetic forces are action-at-a-distance forces.
For example, two magnets can exert a magnetic pull on each other even when separated by a distance of a few centimeters.
These specific forces will be discussed in more detail later in Lesson 2 as well as in other lessons.
Examples of Action at a distance forces are - Gravitational Force, Electrical Force, Magnetic Force.
Applied Force - An applied force is a force that is applied to an object by a person or another object.
If a person is pushing a desk across the room, then there is an applied force acting upon the object.
The applied force is the force exerted on the desk by the person.
Gravity Force(also known as Weight) - The force of gravity is the force with which the earth, moon, or other massively large object attracts another object towards itself.
By definition, this is the weight of the object.
All objects upon earth experience a force of gravity that is directed "downward" towards the center of the earth.
The force of gravity on earth is always equal to the weight of the object as found by the equation:
Normal Force - The normal force is the support force exerted upon an object that is in contact with another stable object.
For example, if a book is resting upon a surface, then the surface is exerting an upward force upon the book in order to support the weight of the book.
On occasions, a normal force is exerted horizontally between two objects that are in contact with each other.
For instance, if a person leans against a wall, the wall pushes horizontally on the person.
Friction Force - The friction force is the force exerted by a surface as an object moves across it or makes an effort to move across it.
There are at least two types of friction force - sliding and static friction.
Though it is not always the case, the friction force often opposes the motion of an object.
For example, if a book slides across the surface of a desk, then the desk exerts a friction force in the opposite direction of its motion.
Friction results from the two surfaces being pressed together closely, causing intermolecular attractive forces between molecules of different surfaces.
As such, friction depends upon the nature of the two surfaces and upon the degree to which they are pressed together.
The maximum amount of friction force that a surface can exert upon an object can be calculated using the formula below:
Air Resistance Force - The air resistance is a special type of frictional force that acts upon objects as they travel through the air.
The force of air resistance is often observed to oppose the motion of an object.
This force will frequently be neglected due to its negligible magnitude (and due to the fact that it is mathematically difficult to predict its value).
It is most noticeable for objects that travel at high speeds (e.
g.
, a skydiver or a downhill skier) or for objects with large surface areas.
Air resistance will be discussed in more detail in Lesson 3.
Tension Force -The tension force is the force that is transmitted through a string, rope, cable or wire when it is pulled tight by forces acting from opposite ends.
The tension force is directed along the length of the wire and pulls equally on the objects on the opposite ends of the wire.
Spring Force -The spring force is the force exerted by a compressed or stretched spring upon any object that is attached to it.
An object that compresses or stretches a spring is always acted upon by a force that restores the object to its rest or equilibrium position.
For most springs (specifically, for those that are said to obey "Hooke's Law"), the magnitude of the force is directly proportional to the amount of stretch or compression of the spring.
A few further comments should be added about the single force that is a source of much confusion to many students of physics - the force of gravity.
As mentioned above, the force of gravity acting upon an object is sometimes referred to as the weight of the object.
Many students of physics confuse weight with mass.
The mass of an object refers to the amount of matter that is contained by the object; the weight of an object is the force of gravity acting upon that object.
Mass is related to how much stuff is there and weight is related to the pull of the Earth (or any other planet) upon that stuff.
The mass of an object (measured in kg) will be the same no matter where in the universe that object is located.
Mass is never altered by location, the pull of gravity, speed or even the existence of other forces.
For example, a 2-kg object will have a mass of 2 kg whether it is located on Earth, the moon, or Jupiter; its mass will be 2 kg whether it is moving or not (at least for purposes of our study); and its mass will be 2 kg whether it is being pushed upon or not.
On the other hand, the weight of an object (measured in Newton) will vary according to where in the universe the object is.
Weight depends upon which planet is exerting the force and the distance the object is from the planet.
Weight, being equivalent to the force of gravity, is dependent upon the value of g - the gravitational field strength.
On earth's surface g is 9.
8 N/kg (often approximated as 10 N/kg).
On the moon's surface, g is 1.
7 N/kg.
Go to another planet, and there will be another g value.
Furthermore, the g value is inversely proportional to the distance from the center of the planet.
So if we were to measure g at a distance of 400 km above the earth's surface, then we would find the g value to be less than 9.
8 N/kg.
Always be cautious of the distinction between mass and weight.
It is the source of much confusion for many students of physics.
A 1.
0-kg mass is suspended from a spring scale in an effort to determine its weight.
The scale reads just short of 10.
0 N - close enough to call it 9.
8 N.
Mass refers to how much stuff is present in the object.
Weight refers to the force with which gravity pulls upon the object.
As mentioned above, the friction force is the force exerted by a surface as an object moves across it or makes an effort to move across it.
there are two types of friction force - static friction and sliding friction.
Sliding friction results when an object slides across a surface.
As an example, consider pushing a box across a floor.
The floor surface offers resistance to the movement of the box.
We often say that the floor exerts a friction force upon the box.
This is an example of a sliding friction force since it results from the sliding motion of the box.
If a car slams on its brakes and skids to a stop (without antilock brakes), there is a sliding friction force exerted upon the car tires by the roadway surface.
This friction force is also a sliding friction force because the car is sliding across the road surface.
Sliding friction forces can be calculated from knowledge of the coefficient of friction and the normal force exerted upon the object by the surface it is sliding across.
The symbol μfrict-sliding represents the coefficient of sliding friction between the two surfaces.
The coefficient value is dependent primarily upon the nature of the surfaces that are in contact with each other.
For most surface combinations, the friction coefficients show little dependence upon other variables such as area of contact, temperature, etc.
Values of μsliding have been experimentally determined for a variety of surface combinations and are often tabulated in technical manuals and handbooks.
The values of μ provide a measure of the relative amount of adhesion or attraction of the two surfaces for each other.
The more that surface molecules tend to adhere to each other, the greater the coefficient values and the greater the friction force.
Friction forces can also exist when the two surfaces are not sliding across each other.
Such friction forces are referred to as static friction.
Static friction results when the surfaces of two objects are at rest relative to one another and a force exists on one of the objects to set it into motion relative to the other object.
Suppose you were to push with 5-Newton of force on a large box to move it across the floor.
The box might remain in place.
A static friction force exists between the surfaces of the floor and the box to prevent the box from being set into motion.
The static friction force balances the force that you exert on the box such that the stationary box remains at rest.
When exerting 5 Newton of applied force on the box, the static friction force has a magnitude of 5 Newton.
Suppose that you were to push with 25 Newton of force on the large box and the box were to still remain in place.
Static friction now has a magnitude of 25 Newton.
Then suppose that you were to increase the force to 26 Newton and the box finally budged from its resting position and was set into motion across the floor.
The box-floor surfaces were able to provide up to 25 Newton of static friction force to match your applied force.
Yet the two surfaces were not able to provide 26 Newton of static friction force.
The amount of static friction resulting from the adhesion of any two surfaces has an upper limit.
In this case, the static friction force spans the range from 0 Newton (if there is no force upon the box) to 25 Newton (if you push on the box with 25 Newton of force).
The symbol μfrict-static represents the coefficient of static friction between the two surfaces.
Like the coefficient of sliding friction, this coefficient is dependent upon the types of surfaces that are attempting to move across each other.
In general, values of static friction coefficients are greater than the values of sliding friction coefficients for the same two surfaces.
Thus, it typically takes more force to budge an object into motion than it does to maintain the motion once it has been started.
The meaning of each of these forces listed in the table above will have to be thoroughly understood to be successful during this unit.
Ultimately, you must be able to read a verbal description of a physical situation and know enough about these forces to recognize their presence (or absence) and to construct a free-body diagram that illustrates their relative magnitude and direction.
Friction forces can also exist when the two surfaces are not sliding across each other.
Such friction forces are referred to as static friction.
Static friction results when the surfaces of two objects are at rest relative to one another and a force exists on one of the objects to set it into motion relative to the other object.
Suppose you were to push with 5-Newton of force on a large box to move it across the floor.
The box might remain in place.
A static friction force exists between the surfaces of the floor and the box to prevent the box from being set into motion.
The static friction force balances the force that you exert on the box such that the stationary box remains at rest.
When exerting 5 Newton of applied force on the box, the static friction force has a magnitude of 5 Newton.
Suppose that you were to push with 25 Newton of force on the large box and the box were to still remain in place.
Static friction now has a magnitude of 25 Newton.
Then suppose that you were to increase the force to 26 Newton and the box finally budged from its resting position and was set into motion across the floor.
The box-floor surfaces were able to provide up to 25 Newton of static friction force to match your applied force.
Yet the two surfaces were not able to provide 26 Newton of static friction force.
The amount of static friction resulting from the adhesion of any two surfaces has an upper limit.
In this case, the static friction force spans the range from 0 Newton (if there is no force upon the box) to 25 Newton (if you push on the box with 25 Newton of force).
Free-body diagrams are diagrams used to show the relative magnitude and direction of all forces acting upon an object in a given situation.
A free-body diagram is a special example of the vector diagrams that were discussed in an earlier unit.
These diagrams will be used throughout our study of physics.
The size of the arrow in a free-body diagram reflects the magnitude of the force.
The direction of the arrow shows the direction that the force is acting.
Each force arrow in the diagram is labeled to indicate the exact type of force.
It is generally customary in a free-body diagram to represent the object by a box and to draw the force arrow from the center of the box outward in the direction that the force is acting.
An example of a free-body diagram is shown at the right.
The free-body diagram above depicts four forces acting upon the object.
Objects do not necessarily always have four forces acting upon them.
There will be cases in which the number of forces depicted by a free-body diagram will be one, two, or three.
There is no hard and fast rule about the number of forces that must be drawn in a free-body diagram.
The only rule for drawing free-body diagrams is to depict all the forces that exist for that object in the given situation.
Thus, to construct free-body diagrams, it is extremely important to know the various types of forces.
If given a description of a physical situation, begin by using your understanding of the force types to identify which forces are present.
Then determine the direction in which each force is acting.
Finally, draw a box and add arrows for each existing force in the appropriate direction; label each force arrow according to its type.
If necessary, refer to the list of forces and their description in order to understand the various force types and their appropriate symbols.
Newton's First Law of Motion states that objects continue to move in a state of constant velocity unless acted upon by an external net force or resultant force.
This law is an extension of Galileo's insight that constant velocity was associated with a lack of net force (see a more detailed description of this below).
Newton proposed that every object with mass has an innate inertia that functions as the fundamental equilibrium "natural state" in place of the Aristotelian idea of the "natural state of rest".
That is, the first law contradicts the intuitive Aristotelian belief that a net force is required to keep an object moving with constant velocity.
By making rest physically indistinguishable from non-zero constant velocity, Newton's First Law directly connects inertia with the concept of relative velocities.
Specifically, in systems where objects are moving with different velocities, it is impossible to determine which object is "in motion" and which object is "at rest".
In other words, to phrase matters more technically, the laws of physics are the same in every inertial frame of reference, that is, in all frames related by a Galilean transformation.
An object at rest tends to stay at rest and an object in motion tends to stay in motion with the same speed and in the same direction unless acted upon by an unbalanced force.
For instance, while traveling in a moving vehicle at a constant velocity, the laws of physics do not change from being at rest.
A person can throw a ball straight up in the air and catch it as it falls down without worrying about applying a force in the direction the vehicle is moving.
This is true even though another person who is observing the moving vehicle pass by also observes the ball follow a curving parabolic path in the same direction as the motion of the vehicle.
It is the inertia of the ball associated with its constant velocity in the direction of the vehicle's motion that ensures the ball continues to move forward even as it is thrown up and falls back down.
From the perspective of the person in the car, the vehicle and everything inside of it is at rest: It is the outside world that is moving with a constant speed in the opposite direction.
Since there is no experiment that can distinguish whether it is the vehicle that is at rest or the outside world that is at rest, the two situations are considered to be physically indistinguishable.
Inertia therefore applies equally well to constant velocity motion as it does to rest.
The concept of inertia can be further generalized to explain the tendency of objects to continue in many different forms of constant motion, even those that are not strictly constant velocity.
The rotational inertia of planet Earth is what fixes the constancy of the length of a day and the length of a year.
Albert Einstein extended the principle of inertia further when he explained that reference frames subject to constant acceleration, such as those free-falling toward a gravitating object, were physically equivalent to inertial reference frames.
This is why, for example, astronauts experience weightlessness when in free-fall orbit around the Earth, and why Newton's Laws of Motion are more easily discernible in such environments.
If an astronaut places an object with mass in mid-air next to himself, it will remain stationary with respect to the astronaut due to its inertia.
This is the same thing that would occur if the astronaut and the object were in intergalactic space with no net force of gravity acting on their shared reference frame.
This principle of equivalence was one of the foundational underpinnings for the development of the general theory of relativity.
In the statement of Newton's first law, the unbalanced force refers to that force that does not become completely balanced (or canceled) by the other individual forces.
If either all the vertical forces (up and down) do not cancel each other and/or all horizontal forces do not cancel each other, then an unbalanced force exists.
The existence of an unbalanced force for a given situation can be quickly realized by looking at the free-body diagram for that situation.
Free-body diagrams for three situations are shown below.
Note that the actual magnitudes of the individual forces are indicated on the diagram.
The net force is the vector sum of all the forces that act upon an object.
That is to say, the net force is the sum of all the forces, taking into account the fact that a force is a vector and two forces of equal magnitude and opposite direction will cancel each other out.
At this point, the rules for summing vectors (such as force vectors) will be kept relatively simple.
Newton's first law of motion predicts the behavior of objects for which all existing forces are balanced.
The first law - sometimes referred to as the law of inertia - states that if the forces acting upon an object are balanced, then the acceleration of that object will be 0 m/s/s.
Objects at equilibrium (the condition in which all forces balance) will not accelerate.
According to Newton, an object will only accelerate if there is a net or unbalanced force acting upon it.
The presence of an unbalanced force will accelerate an object - changing its speed, its direction, or both its speed and direction.
Newton's Second Law asserts the direct proportionality of acceleration to force and the inverse proportionality of acceleration to mass.
Accelerations can be defined through kinematic measurements.
However, while kinematics are well-described through reference frame analysis in advanced physics, there are still deep questions that remain as to what is the proper definition of mass.
General relativity offers an equivalence between space-time and mass, but lacking a coherent theory of quantum gravity, it is unclear as to how or whether this connection is relevant on microscales.
With some justification, Newton's second law can be taken as a quantitative definition of mass by writing the law as an equality; the relative units of force and mass then are fixed.
Newton's second law of motion pertains to the behavior of objects for which all existing forces are not balanced.
The second law states that the acceleration of an object is dependent upon two variables - the net force acting upon the object and the mass of the object.
The acceleration of an object depends directly upon the net force acting upon the object, and inversely upon the mass of the object.
As the force acting upon an object is increased, the acceleration of the object is increased.
As the mass of an object is increased, the acceleration of the object is decreased.
Newton's second law of motion can be formally stated as follows:
The acceleration of an object as produced by a net force is directly proportional to the magnitude of the net force, in the same direction as the net force, and inversely proportional to the mass of the object.
Newton's first law of motion declares that a force is not needed to keep an object in motion.
Slide a book across a table and watch it slide to a rest position.
The book in motion on the table top does not come to a rest position because of the absence of a force; rather it is the presence of a force - that force being the force of friction - that brings the book to a rest position.
In the absence of a force of friction, the book would continue in motion with the same speed and direction - forever (or at least to the end of the table top)! A force is not required to keep a moving book in motion; and a force is not required to keep a moving sled in motion; and a force is not required to keep any object horizontally moving object in motion.
A force is a push or a pull that acts upon an object as a results of its interaction with another object.
Forces result from interactions! As discussed in Lesson 2, some forces result from contact interactions (normal, frictional, tensional, and applied forces are examples of contact forces) and other forces are the result of action-at-a-distance interactions (gravitational, electrical, and magnetic forces).
According to Newton, whenever objects A and B interact with each other, they exert forces upon each other.
When you sit in your chair, your body exerts a downward force on the chair and the chair exerts an upward force on your body.
There are two forces resulting from this interaction - a force on the chair and a force on your body.
These two forces are called action and reaction forces and are the subject of Newton's third law of motion.
Formally stated, Newton's third law is:For every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.
The statement means that in every interaction, there is a pair of forces acting on the two interacting objects.
The size of the forces on the first object equals the size of the force on the second object.
The direction of the force on the first object is opposite to the direction of the force on the second object.
Forces always come in pairs - equal and opposite action-reaction force pairs.
Newton's Third Law is a result of applying symmetry to situations where forces can be attributed to the presence of different objects.
The third law means that all forces are interactions between different bodies,[Note 3] and thus that there is no such thing as a unidirectional force or a force that acts on only one body.
Whenever a first body exerts a force F on a second body, the second body exerts a force −F on the first body.
F and −F are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
This law is sometimes referred to as the action-reaction law, with F called the "action" and −F the "reaction".
The action and the reaction are simultaneous:
A variety of action-reaction force pairs are evident in nature.
Consider the propulsion of a fish through the water.
A fish uses its fins to push water backwards.
But a push on the water will only serve to accelerate the water.
Since forces result from mutual interactions, the water must also be pushing the fish forwards, propelling the fish through the water.
The size of the force on the water equals the size of the force on the fish; the direction of the force on the water (backwards) is opposite the direction of the force on the fish (forwards).
For every action, there is an equal (in size) and opposite (in direction) reaction force.
Action-reaction force pairs make it possible for fish to swim.
Consider the flying motion of birds.
A bird flies by use of its wings.
The wings of a bird push air downwards.
Since forces result from mutual interactions, the air must also be pushing the bird upwards.
The size of the force on the air equals the size of the force on the bird; the direction of the force on the air (downwards) is opposite the direction of the force on the bird (upwards).
For every action, there is an equal (in size) and opposite (in direction) reaction.
Action-reaction force pairs make it possible for birds to fly.
Consider the motion of a car on the way to school.
A car is equipped with wheels that spin.
As the wheels spin, they grip the road and push the road backwards.
Since forces result from mutual interactions, the road must also be pushing the wheels forward.
The size of the force on the road equals the size of the force on the wheels (or car); the direction of the force on the road (backwards) is opposite the direction of the force on the wheels (forwards).
For every action, there is an equal (in size) and opposite (in direction) reaction.
Action-reaction force pairs make it possible for cars to move along a roadway surface.
This means that in a closed system of particles, there are no internal forces that are unbalanced.
That is, the action-reaction force shared between any two objects in a closed system will not cause the center of mass of the system to accelerate.
The constituent objects only accelerate with respect to each other, the system itself remains unaccelerated.
Alternatively, if an external force acts on the system, then the center of mass will experience an acceleration proportional to the magnitude of the external force divided by the mass of the system.
:19-1
Since forces are perceived as pushes or pulls, this can provide an intuitive understanding for describing forces.
As with other physical concepts (e.
g.
temperature), the intuitive understanding of forces is quantified using precise operational definitions that are consistent with direct observations and compared to a standard measurement scale.
Through experimentation, it is determined that laboratory measurements of forces are fully consistent with the conceptual definition of force offered by Newtonian mechanics.
Forces act in a particular direction and have sizes dependent upon how strong the push or pull is.
Because of these characteristics, forces are classified as "vector quantities".
This means that forces follow a different set of mathematical rules than physical quantities that do not have direction (denoted scalar quantities).
For example, when determining what happens when two forces act on the same object, it is necessary to know both the magnitude and the direction of both forces to calculate the result.
If both of these pieces of information are not known for each force, the situation is ambiguous.
For example, if you know that two people are pulling on the same rope with known magnitudes of force but you do not know which direction either person is pulling, it is impossible to determine what the acceleration of the rope will be.
The two people could be pulling against each other as in tug of war or the two people could be pulling in the same direction.
In this simple one-dimensional example, without knowing the direction of the forces it is impossible to decide whether the net force is the result of adding the two force magnitudes or subtracting one from the other.
Associating forces with vectors avoids such problems.
Historically, forces were first quantitatively investigated in conditions of static equilibrium where several forces canceled each other out.
Such experiments demonstrate the crucial properties that forces are additive vector quantities: they have magnitude and direction.
When two forces act on a point particle, the resulting force, the resultant (also called the net force), can be determined by following the parallelogram rule of vector addition: the addition of two vectors represented by sides of a parallelogram, gives an equivalent resultant vector that is equal in magnitude and direction to the transversal of the parallelogram.
The magnitude of the resultant varies from the difference of the magnitudes of the two forces to their sum, depending on the angle between their lines of action.
However, if the forces are acting on an extended body, their respective lines of application must also be specified in order to account for their effects on the motion of the body.
As well as being added, forces can also be resolved into independent components at right angles to each other.
A horizontal force pointing northeast can therefore be split into two forces, one pointing north, and one pointing east.
Summing these component forces using vector addition yields the original force.
Resolving force vectors into components of a set of basis vectors is often a more mathematically clean way to describe forces than using magnitudes and directions.
This is because, for orthogonal components, the components of the vector sum are uniquely determined by the scalar addition of the components of the individual vectors.
Orthogonal components are independent of each other because forces acting at ninety degrees to each other have no effect on the magnitude or direction of the other.
Choosing a set of orthogonal basis vectors is often done by considering what set of basis vectors will make the mathematics most convenient.
Choosing a basis vector that is in the same direction as one of the forces is desirable, since that force would then have only one non-zero component.
Orthogonal force vectors can be three-dimensional with the third component being at right-angles to the other two.
Pushing against an object on a frictional surface can result in a situation where the object does not move because the applied force is opposed by static friction, generated between the object and the table surface.
For a situation with no movement, the static friction force exactly balances the applied force resulting in no acceleration.
The static friction increases or decreases in response to the applied force up to an upper limit determined by the characteristics of the contact between the surface and the object.
Equilibrium in physics means, forces are in balance.
The net force should be zero.
In other words, forces acting downward and acting upward, and forces acting right and acting left should be equal in magnitude.
If an object is at rest and is in a state of equilibrium, then we would say that the object is at "static equilibrium.
" "Static" means stationary or at rest.
A common physics lab is to hang an object by two or more strings and to measure the forces that are exerted at angles upon the object to support its weight.
The state of the object is analyzed in terms of the forces acting upon the object.
The object is a point on a string upon which three forces were acting.
See diagram at right.
If the object is at equilibrium, then the net force acting upon the object should be 0 Newton.
Thus, if all the forces are added together as vectors, then the resultant force (the vector sum) should be 0 Newton.
(Recall that the net force is "the vector sum of all the forces" or the resultant of adding all the individual forces head-to-tail.
) Thus, an accurately drawn vector addition diagram can be constructed to determine the resultant.
A static equilibrium between two forces is the most usual way of measuring forces, using simple devices such as weighing scales and spring balances.
For example, an object suspended on a vertical spring scale experiences the force of gravity acting on the object balanced by a force applied by the "spring reaction force", which equals the object's weight.
Using such tools, some quantitative force laws were discovered: that the force of gravity is proportional to volume for objects of constant density (widely exploited for millennia to define standard weights); Archimedes' principle for buoyancy; Archimedes' analysis of the lever; Boyle's law for gas pressure; and Hooke's law for springs.
These were all formulated and experimentally verified before Isaac Newton expounded his Three Laws of Motion.
Dynamic equilibrium was first described by Galileo who noticed that certain assumptions of Aristotelian physics were contradicted by observations and logic.
Galileo realized that simple velocity addition demands that the concept of an "absolute rest frame" did not exist.
Galileo concluded that motion in a constant velocity was completely equivalent to rest.
This was contrary to Aristotle's notion of a "natural state" of rest that objects with mass naturally approached.
Simple experiments showed that Galileo's understanding of the equivalence of constant velocity and rest were correct.
For example, if a mariner dropped a cannonball from the crow's nest of a ship moving at a constant velocity, Aristotelian physics would have the cannonball fall straight down while the ship moved beneath it.
Thus, in an Aristotelian universe, the falling cannonball would land behind the foot of the mast of a moving ship.
However, when this experiment is actually conducted, the cannonball always falls at the foot of the mast, as if the cannonball knows to travel with the ship despite being separated from it.
Since there is no forward horizontal force being applied on the cannonball as it falls, the only conclusion left is that the cannonball continues to move with the same velocity as the boat as it falls.
Thus, no force is required to keep the cannonball moving at the constant forward velocity.
Dynamic equilibrium refers to a system which at a macro level looks static (unchanging with time), but at a deeper level has opposing processes than cancel each other out to make the macro-state stable.
Example: A room full of static air has no net flux from one part of the room to any other part.
At a deeper level, each small cube of air has a flow of air molecules out to each adjacent box, and a flow of molecules from each adjacent box into the central box.
A system can have dynamic equilibrium with respect to particle flows; momentum, energy, and angular momentum flow; and flows of heat (disordered kinetic energy) and radiation.
A simple case of dynamic equilibrium occurs in constant velocity motion across a surface with kinetic friction.
In such a situation, a force is applied in the direction of motion while the kinetic friction force exactly opposes the applied force.
This results in zero net force, but since the object started with a non-zero velocity, it continues to move with a non-zero velocity.
Aristotle misinterpreted this motion as being caused by the applied force.
However, when kinetic friction is taken into consideration it is clear that there is no net force causing constant velocity motion.
The notion "force" keeps its meaning in quantum mechanics, though one is now dealing with operators instead of classical variables and though the physics is now described by the Schrödinger equation instead of Newtonian equations.
This has the consequence that the results of a measurement are now sometimes "quantized", i.
e.
they appear in discrete portions.
This is, of course, difficult to imagine in the context of "forces".
However, the potentials V(x,y,z) or fields, from which the forces generally can be derived, are treated similar to classical position variables, i.
e.
, .
However, already in quantum mechanics there is one "caveat", namely the particles acting onto each other do not only possess the spatial variable, but also a discrete intrinsic angular momentum-like variable called the "spin", and there is the Pauli principle relating the space and the spin variables.
Depending on the value of the spin, identical particles split into two different classes, fermions and bosons.
If two identical fermions (e.
g.
electrons) have a symmetric spin function (e.
g.
parallel spins) the spatial variables must be antisymmetric (i.
e.
they exclude each other from their places much as if there was a repulsive force), and vice versa, i.
e.
for antiparallel spins the position variables must be symmetric (i.
e.
the apparent force must be attractive).
Thus in the case of two fermions there is a strictly negative correlation between spatial and spin variables, whereas for two bosons (e.
g.
quanta of electromagnetic waves, photons) the correlation is strictly positive.
In modern particle physics, forces and the acceleration of particles are explained as a mathematical by-product of exchange of momentum-carrying gauge bosons.
With the development of quantum field theory and general relativity, it was realized that force is a redundant concept arising from conservation of momentum (4-momentum in relativity and momentum of virtual particles in quantum electrodynamics).
The conservation of momentum can be directly derived from the homogeneity or symmetry of space and so is usually considered more fundamental than the concept of a force.
Thus the currently known fundamental forces are considered more accurately to be "fundamental interactions".
:199–128 When particle A emits (creates) or absorbs (annihilates) virtual particle B, a momentum conservation results in recoil of particle A making impression of repulsion or attraction between particles A A' exchanging by B.
This description applies to all forces arising from fundamental interactions.
While sophisticated mathematical descriptions are needed to predict, in full detail, the accurate result of such interactions, there is a conceptually simple way to describe such interactions through the use of Feynman diagrams.
In a Feynman diagram, each matter particle is represented as a straight line (see world line) traveling through time, which normally increases up or to the right in the diagram.
Matter and anti-matter particles are identical except for their direction of propagation through the Feynman diagram.
World lines of particles intersect at interaction vertices, and the Feynman diagram represents any force arising from an interaction as occurring at the vertex with an associated instantaneous change in the direction of the particle world lines.
Gauge bosons are emitted away from the vertex as wavy lines and, in the case of virtual particle exchange, are absorbed at an adjacent vertex.
All of the forces in the universe are based on four fundamental interactions.
The strong and weak forces are nuclear forces that act only at very short distances, and are responsible for the interactions between subatomic particles, including nucleons and compound nuclei.
The electromagnetic force acts between electric charges, and the gravitational force acts between masses.
All other forces in nature derive from these four fundamental interactions.
For example, friction is a manifestation of the electromagnetic force acting between the atoms of two surfaces, and the Pauli exclusion principle, which does not permit atoms to pass through each other.
Similarly, the forces in springs, modeled by Hooke's law, are the result of electromagnetic forces and the Exclusion Principle acting together to return an object to its equilibrium position.
Centrifugal forces are acceleration forces that arise simply from the acceleration of rotating frames of reference.
The development of fundamental theories for forces proceeded along the lines of unification of disparate ideas.
For example, Isaac Newton unified the force responsible for objects falling at the surface of the Earth with the force responsible for the orbits of celestial mechanics in his universal theory of gravitation.
Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell demonstrated that electric and magnetic forces were unified through one consistent theory of electromagnetism.
In the 20th century, the development of quantum mechanics led to a modern understanding that the first three fundamental forces (all except gravity) are manifestations of matter (fermions) interacting by exchanging virtual particles called gauge bosons.
This standard model of particle physics posits a similarity between the forces and led scientists to predict the unification of the weak and electromagnetic forces in electroweak theory subsequently confirmed by observation.
The complete formulation of the standard model predicts an as yet unobserved Higgs mechanism, but observations such as neutrino oscillations indicate that the standard model is incomplete.
A Grand Unified Theory allowing for the combination of the electroweak interaction with the strong force is held out as a possibility with candidate theories such as supersymmetry proposed to accommodate some of the outstanding unsolved problems in physics.
Physicists are still attempting to develop self-consistent unification models that would combine all four fundamental interactions into a theory of everything.
Einstein tried and failed at this endeavor, but currently the most popular approach to answering this question is string theory.
What we now call gravity was not identified as a universal force until the work of Isaac Newton.
Before Newton, the tendency for objects to fall towards the Earth was not understood to be related to the motions of celestial objects.
Galileo was instrumental in describing the characteristics of falling objects by determining that the acceleration of every object in free-fall was constant and independent of the mass of the object.
Today, this acceleration due to gravity towards the surface of the Earth is usually designated as  and has a magnitude of about 9.
81 meters per second squared (this measurement is taken from sea level and may vary depending on location), and points toward the center of the Earth.
This observation means that the force of gravity on an object at the Earth's surface is directly proportional to the object's mass.
Thus an object that has a mass of  will experience a force:
Newton came to realize that the effects of gravity might be observed in different ways at larger distances.
In particular, Newton determined that the acceleration of the Moon around the Earth could be ascribed to the same force of gravity if the acceleration due to gravity decreased as an inverse square law.
Further, Newton realized that the acceleration due to gravity is proportional to the mass of the attracting body.
Combining these ideas gives a formula that relates the mass () and the radius () of the Earth to the gravitational acceleration:
In this equation, a dimensional constant  is used to describe the relative strength of gravity.
This constant has come to be known as Newton's Universal Gravitation Constant, though its value was unknown in Newton's lifetime.
Not until 1798 was Henry Cavendish able to make the first measurement of  using a torsion balance; this was widely reported in the press as a measurement of the mass of the Earth since knowing  could allow one to solve for the Earth's mass given the above equation.
Newton, however, realized that since all celestial bodies followed the same laws of motion, his law of gravity had to be universal.
Succinctly stated, Newton's Law of Gravitation states that the force on a spherical object of mass  due to the gravitational pull of mass  is
It was only the orbit of the planet Mercury that Newton's Law of Gravitation seemed not to fully explain.
Some astrophysicists predicted the existence of another planet (Vulcan) that would explain the discrepancies; however, despite some early indications, no such planet could be found.
When Albert Einstein formulated his theory of general relativity (GR) he turned his attention to the problem of Mercury's orbit and found that his theory added a correction, which could account for the discrepancy.
This was the first time that Newton's Theory of Gravity had been shown to be less correct than an alternative.
Since then, and so far, general relativity has been acknowledged as the theory that best explains gravity.
In GR, gravitation is not viewed as a force, but rather, objects moving freely in gravitational fields travel under their own inertia in straight lines through curved space-time – defined as the shortest space-time path between two space-time events.
From the perspective of the object, all motion occurs as if there were no gravitation whatsoever.
It is only when observing the motion in a global sense that the curvature of space-time can be observed and the force is inferred from the object's curved path.
Thus, the straight line path in space-time is seen as a curved line in space, and it is called the ballistic trajectory of the object.
For example, a basketball thrown from the ground moves in a parabola, as it is in a uniform gravitational field.
Its space-time trajectory (when the extra ct dimension is added) is almost a straight line, slightly curved (with the radius of curvature of the order of few light-years).
The time derivative of the changing momentum of the object is what we label as "gravitational force".
Through combining the definition of electric current as the time rate of change of electric charge, a rule of vector multiplication called Lorentz's Law describes the force on a charge moving in a magnetic field.
The connection between electricity and magnetism allows for the description of a unified electromagnetic force that acts on a charge.
This force can be written as a sum of the electrostatic force (due to the electric field) and the magnetic force (due to the magnetic field).
Fully stated, this is the law:
The origin of electric and magnetic fields would not be fully explained until 1864 when James Clerk Maxwell unified a number of earlier theories into a set of 20 scalar equations, which were later reformulated into 4 vector equations by Oliver Heaviside and Josiah Willard Gibbs.
These "Maxwell Equations" fully described the sources of the fields as being stationary and moving charges, and the interactions of the fields themselves.
This led Maxwell to discover that electric and magnetic fields could be "self-generating" through a wave that traveled at a speed that he calculated to be the speed of light.
This insight united the nascent fields of electromagnetic theory with optics and led directly to a complete description of the electromagnetic spectrum.
However, attempting to reconcile electromagnetic theory with two observations, the photoelectric effect, and the nonexistence of the ultraviolet catastrophe, proved troublesome.
Through the work of leading theoretical physicists, a new theory of electromagnetism was developed using quantum mechanics.
This final modification to electromagnetic theory ultimately led to quantum electrodynamics (or QED), which fully describes all electromagnetic phenomena as being mediated by wave–particles known as photons.
In QED, photons are the fundamental exchange particle, which described all interactions relating to electromagnetism including the electromagnetic force.
It is a common misconception to ascribe the stiffness and rigidity of solid matter to the repulsion of like charges under the influence of the electromagnetic force.
However, these characteristics actually result from the Pauli exclusion principle.
[citation needed] Since electrons are fermions, they cannot occupy the same quantum mechanical state as other electrons.
When the electrons in a material are densely packed together, there are not enough lower energy quantum mechanical states for them all, so some of them must be in higher energy states.
This means that it takes energy to pack them together.
While this effect is manifested macroscopically as a structural force, it is technically only the result of the existence of a finite set of electron states.
The strong force only acts directly upon elementary particles.
However, a residual of the force is observed between hadrons (the best known example being the force that acts between nucleons in atomic nuclei) as the nuclear force.
Here the strong force acts indirectly, transmitted as gluons, which form part of the virtual pi and rho mesons, which classically transmit the nuclear force (see this topic for more).
The failure of many searches for free quarks has shown that the elementary particles affected are not directly observable.
This phenomenon is called color confinement.
In quantum chromodynamics (QCD), color confinement, often simply called confinement, is the phenomenon that color charged particles (such as quarks and gluons) cannot be isolated, and therefore cannot be directly observed in normal conditions below the Hagedorn temperature of approximately 2 trillion kelvin (corresponding to energies of approximately 130–140 MeV per particle).
Quarks and gluons must clump together to form hadrons.
The two main types of hadron are the mesons (one quark, one antiquark) and the baryons (three quarks).
In addition, colorless glueballs formed only of gluons are also consistent with confinement, though difficult to identify experimentally.
Quarks and gluons cannot be separated from their parent hadron without producing new hadrons.
The weak force is due to the exchange of the heavy W and Z bosons.
Its most familiar effect is beta decay (of neutrons in atomic nuclei) and the associated radioactivity.
The word "weak" derives from the fact that the field strength is some 1013 times less than that of the strong force.
Still, it is stronger than gravity over short distances.
A consistent electroweak theory has also been developed, which shows that electromagnetic forces and the weak force are indistinguishable at a temperatures in excess of approximately 1015 kelvins.
Such temperatures have been probed in modern particle accelerators and show the conditions of the universe in the early moments of the Big Bang.
The W bosons are named after the weak force.
The physicist Steven Weinberg named the additional particle the " Z  particle", and later gave the explanation that it was the last additional particle needed by the model.
The W bosons had already been named, and the Z bosons were named for having zero electric charge.
The two W bosons are verified mediators of neutrino absorption and emission.
During these processes, the W±
boson charge induces electron or positron emission or absorption, thus causing nuclear transmutation.
The Z boson is not involved in the absorption or emission of electrons and positrons.
The Z  boson mediates the transfer of momentum, spin and energy when neutrinos scatter elastically from matter (a process which conserves charge).
Such behavior is almost as common as inelastic neutrino interactions and may be observed in bubble chambers upon irradiation with neutrino beams.
Whenever an electron is observed as a new free particle suddenly moving with kinetic energy, it is inferred to be a result of a neutrino interacting directly with the electron, since this behavior happens more often when the neutrino beam is present.
In this process, the neutrino simply strikes the electron and then scatters away from it, transferring some of the neutrino's momentum to the electron.
The normal force is due to repulsive forces of interaction between atoms at close contact.
When their electron clouds overlap, Pauli repulsion (due to fermionic nature of electrons) follows resulting in the force that acts in a direction normal to the surface interface between two objects.
:93 The normal force, for example, is responsible for the structural integrity of tables and floors as well as being the force that responds whenever an external force pushes on a solid object.
An example of the normal force in action is the impact force on an object crashing into an immobile surface.
Tension forces can be modeled using ideal strings that are massless, frictionless, unbreakable, and unstretchable.
They can be combined with ideal pulleys, which allow ideal strings to switch physical direction.
Ideal strings transmit tension forces instantaneously in action-reaction pairs so that if two objects are connected by an ideal string, any force directed along the string by the first object is accompanied by a force directed along the string in the opposite direction by the second object.
By connecting the same string multiple times to the same object through the use of a set-up that uses movable pulleys, the tension force on a load can be multiplied.
For every string that acts on a load, another factor of the tension force in the string acts on the load.
However, even though such machines allow for an increase in force, there is a corresponding increase in the length of string that must be displaced in order to move the load.
These tandem effects result ultimately in the conservation of mechanical energy since the work done on the load is the same no matter how complicated the machine.
Newton's laws and Newtonian mechanics in general were first developed to describe how forces affect idealized point particles rather than three-dimensional objects.
However, in real life, matter has extended structure and forces that act on one part of an object might affect other parts of an object.
For situations where lattice holding together the atoms in an object is able to flow, contract, expand, or otherwise change shape, the theories of continuum mechanics describe the way forces affect the material.
For example, in extended fluids, differences in pressure result in forces being directed along the pressure gradients as follows: where  is the relevant cross-sectional area for the volume for which the stress-tensor is being calculated.
This formalism includes pressure terms associated with forces that act normal to the cross-sectional area (the matrix diagonals of the tensor) as well as shear terms associated with forces that act parallel to the cross-sectional area (the off-diagonal elements).
The stress tensor accounts for forces that cause all strains (deformations) including also tensile stresses and compressions.
All physical objects that are in contact can exert forces on each other.
We give these contact forces different names based on the types of objects in contact.
If one of the objects exerting the force happens to be a rope, string, chain, or cable we call the force tension.
Ropes and cables are useful for exerting forces since they can efficiently transfer a force over a significant distance (e.g.the length of the rope).
For instance, a sled can be pulled by a team of Siberian Huskies with ropes secured to them which lets the dogs run with a larger range of motion compared to requiring the Huskies to push on the back surface of the sled from behind using the normal force.
(Yes, that would be the most pathetic dog sled team ever.)
It's important to note here that tension is a pulling force since ropes simply can't push effectively.
Trying to push with a rope causes the rope to go slack and lose the tension that allowed it to pull in the first place.
This might sound obvious, but when it comes time to draw the forces acting on an object, people often draw the force of tension going in the wrong direction so remember that tension can only pull on an object.
Torque is the rotation equivalent of force in the same way that angle is the rotational equivalent for position, angular velocity for velocity, and angular momentum for momentum.
As a consequence of Newton's First Law of Motion, there exists rotational inertia that ensures that all bodies maintain their angular momentum unless acted upon by an unbalanced torque.
Likewise, Newton's Second Law of Motion can be used to derive an analogous equation for the instantaneous angular acceleration of the rigid body: where  is the mass of the object,  is the velocity of the object and  is the distance to the center of the circular path and  is the unit vector pointing in the radial direction outwards from the center.
This means that the unbalanced centripetal force felt by any object is always directed toward the center of the curving path.
Such forces act perpendicular to the velocity vector associated with the motion of an object, and therefore do not change the speed of the object (magnitude of the velocity), but only the direction of the velocity vector.
The unbalanced force that accelerates an object can be resolved into a component that is perpendicular to the path, and one that is tangential to the path.
This yields both the tangential force, which accelerates the object by either slowing it down or speeding it up, and the radial (centripetal) force, which changes its direction.
A conservative force that acts on a closed system has an associated mechanical work that allows energy to convert only between kinetic or potential forms.
This means that for a closed system, the net mechanical energy is conserved whenever a conservative force acts on the system.
The force, therefore, is related directly to the difference in potential energy between two different locations in space, and can be considered to be an artifact of the potential field in the same way that the direction and amount of a flow of water can be considered to be an artifact of the contour map of the elevation of an area.
For certain physical scenarios, it is impossible to model forces as being due to gradient of potentials.
This is often due to macrophysical considerations that yield forces as arising from a macroscopic statistical average of microstates.
For example, friction is caused by the gradients of numerous electrostatic potentials between the atoms, but manifests as a force model that is independent of any macroscale position vector.
Nonconservative forces other than friction include other contact forces, tension, compression, and drag.
However, for any sufficiently detailed description, all these forces are the results of conservative ones since each of these macroscopic forces are the net results of the gradients of microscopic potentials.
The connection between macroscopic nonconservative forces and microscopic conservative forces is described by detailed treatment with statistical mechanics.
In macroscopic closed systems, nonconservative forces act to change the internal energies of the system, and are often associated with the transfer of heat.
According to the Second law of thermodynamics, nonconservative forces necessarily result in energy transformations within closed systems from ordered to more random conditions as entropy increases.
The pound-force has a metric counterpart, less commonly used than the newton: the kilogram-force (kgf) (sometimes kilopond), is the force exerted by standard gravity on one kilogram of mass.
The kilogram-force leads to an alternate, but rarely used unit of mass: the metric slug (sometimes mug or hyl) is that mass that accelerates at 1 m·s−2 when subjected to a force of 1 kgf.
The kilogram-force is not a part of the modern SI system, and is generally deprecated; however it still sees use for some purposes as expressing aircraft weight, jet thrust, bicycle spoke tension, torque wrench settings and engine output torque.
Other arcane units of force include the sthène, which is equivalent to 1000 N, and the kip, which is equivalent to 1000 lbf.