Sky UK (formerly British Sky Broadcasting Limited, BSkyB and Sky) is a British telecommunications company which serves the United Kingdom owned by Comcast.
Sky provides television and broadband Internet services, fixed line and mobile telephone services to consumers and businesses in the United Kingdom.
It is the UK's largest pay-TV broadcaster with 12.
5 million customers as of 2018.
 It was the UK's most popular digital TV service until it was overtaken by Freeview in April 2007.
 Its corporate headquarters are in Isleworth.
The British media company Sky UK has incurred criticism over the years, much of it centred on overcharging, anti-competitive practices, and the business practices and undue political influence of its one-time majority owner News Corporation.
Controversy over Sky's operation of pay TV services on Freeview began in 2006.
It was claimed at various times that Sky was operating in an anti-competitive way in the British pay TV market.
Similar concerns arose about Sky's procurement, distribution and charging levels of films on its Sky Movies service.
Sky was exonerated by the Competition Commission in August 2012.
Sky was found to have overcharged for its Sky Sports channels, and was ordered in 2010 to reduce its charges for these channels.
Its terms for supplying the sports channels to other companies were also challenged in 2010–11; some of the complaints were upheld by the regulatory authorities, others were not.
Another challenge, in 2009, concerned Sky's charges for listing free-to-air channels on its electronic program guide (EPG).
Gordon Brown stated in 2011 that during his term as prime minister (2007–2010), News Corporation attempted to affect government policy with regard to the BBC in pursuit of BSkyB's own commercial interests.
In June 2010, News Corporation launched a takeover bid for the remaining shares in the company.
There was widespread opposition to the bid, on the grounds that it would give NewsCorp too dominant a position in the British media.
The bid was withdrawn in July 2011 following the News International phone hacking scandal.
The British Office of Communications (Ofcom) launched an enquiry that same month to determine whether BSkyB should continue to hold a licence to broadcast.
In September 2012, Ofcom ruled that BSkyB could retain its licence.
An attempt by 21st Century Fox (the successor to News Corporation) in December 2016 to acquire the 61% share of Sky that it did not already own led to concerns again being raised as to whether it would give the Murdoch family too dominant an influence over British media.
 American media conglomerate Comcast entered a rival bid in April 2018, and after an auction, 21st Century Fox no longer has any stake in the company.
As of October 2018, Sky UK is now wholly owned by Comcast.
Formed in March 1994 four years after the merger of Sky Television and British Satellite Broadcasting, Sky became the UK's largest digital subscription television company.
Following Sky's 2014 acquisition of Sky Italia and a majority 90.
04% interest in Sky Deutschland in November 2014, its holding company British Sky Broadcasting Group plc changed its name to Sky plc.
 The UK subsidiary's name was changed from British Sky Broadcasting Limited to Sky UK Limited, and continues to trade as Sky as of November 2018.
Sky UK Limited is a wholly owned subsidiary of Comcast-owned Sky, with its current company directors being Andrew Griffith and Christopher Taylor.
 Andrew Griffith has acted as the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) and the Managing Director for the commercial businesses division, however, it was announced in June 2019 that Kevin O’Toole of Comcast Business will take on the role of Managing Director of Sky Business Communications, reporting to Chris Stylianou.
The present service can trace its heritage back to 1989, when BSkyB's predecessors Sky Television plc and British Satellite Broadcasting encrypted their respective film channels – Sky Movies and The Movie Channel which required viewers to get decoding equipment and a subscription to watch the channels.
After the two companies merged, subscribers could get access to both channels, and later the sports channel Sky Sports also became encrypted.
In the autumn of 1991, talks were held for the broadcast rights for Premier League for a five-year period, from the 1992 season.
 ITV were the current rights holders, and fought hard to retain the new rights.
ITV had increased its offer from £18m to £34m per year to keep control of the rights.
 BSkyB joined forces with the BBC to make a counter bid.
The BBC was given the highlights of most of the matches, while BSkyB paying £304m for the Premier League rights, would give them a monopoly of all live matches, up to 60 per year from the 1992 season.
 Murdoch described sport as a "battering ram" for pay-television, providing a strong customer base.
 A few weeks after the deal, ITV went to the High Court to get an injunction as it believed their bid details had been leaked before the decision was taken.
ITV also asked the Office of Fair Trading to investigate since it believed Rupert Murdoch's media empire via its newspapers had influenced the deal.
 A few days later neither action took effect, ITV believed BSkyB was telephoned and informed of its £262m bid, and Premier League advised BSkyB to increase its counter bid.
BSkyB retained the rights paying £670m 1997–2001 deal, but was challenged by On Digital for the rights from 2001–2004, thus were forced to £1.
1 billion which gave them 66 live games a year.
Following a lengthy legal battle with the European Commission, which deemed the exclusivity of the rights to be against the interests of competition and the consumer, BSkyB's monopoly came to an end from the 2007–08 season.
In May 2006, the Irish broadcaster Setanta Sports was awarded two of the six Premier League packages that the English FA offered to broadcasters.
Sky picked up the remaining four for £1.
3bn.
 In February 2015, Sky bid £4.
2bn for a package of 120 premier league games across the three seasons from 2016.
This represented an increase of 70% on the previous contract and was said to be £1bn more than the company had expected to pay.
The move has been followed by staff cuts, increased subscription prices (including 9% in Sky's family package) and the dropping of the 3D channel.
In September 1993, BSkyB launched Sky Multichannels which was the present digital platform's analogue predecessor.
Sky Multichannels was a subscription package that gave access not only to Sky's own channels but also those of third party broadcasters.
The service started on 1 September 1993.
It was based on an idea by then CEO Sam Chisholm and chairman Rupert Murdoch of converting the company business strategy to an entirely fee-based concept.
The new package included four channels formerly available free-to-air, broadcasting on Astra's satellites, as well as introducing new channels.
 The service continued until the closure of BSkyB's analogue service on 27 September 2001, due to the expansion of the Sky Digital platform after its launch three years before.
Some of the channels did broadcast either in the clear or soft encrypted (whereby a Videocrypt decoder was required to decode, without a subscription card) prior to their addition to the Sky Multichannels package.
 Within two months of the launch, BSkyB gained 400,000 new subscribers, with the majority taking at least one premium channel as well, which helped BSkyB reach 3.
5 million households by mid-1994.
Michael Grade criticised the operations in front of the Select Committee on National Heritage, mainly for the lack of original programming on many of the new channels.
BSkyB's digital service was officially launched on 1 October 1998 under the name Sky Digital, although small-scale tests were carried out before then.
At this time the use of the Sky Digital brand made an important distinction between the new service and Sky's analogue services.
Key selling points were the improvement in picture and sound quality, increased number of channels and an interactive service branded Open.
.
.
.
now called Sky Active, BSkyB competed with the ONdigital (later ITV Digital) terrestrial offering and cable services.
Within 30 days, over 100,000 digiboxes had been sold, which help bolstered BSkyB's decision to give away free digiboxes and minidishes from May 1999.
In addition to most channels from the Sky Multichannels package, Sky Digital launched with several new channels that were exclusive to the digital offer.
The switch-over from analogue to digital proceeded relatively quickly.
In 1998, there were 6 million 'multichannel' TV homes in the UK (i.
e.
homes that watch television other than the traditional analogue terrestrial), and over half of these homes watched television using BSkyB's analogue service.
BSkyB's digital service surpassed the analogue service in terms of subscribers in late 1999.
By June 2000 the service had 3.
6 million subscribers, which gave BSkyB 8.
988 million subscribers across all platforms.
This substantial growth reflected BSkyB's 34% share of viewers in multi-channel homes (up from 13.
4% from 1999).
BSkyB's analogue service ended in October 2001, and the digital service would eventually be marketed as just 'Sky'.
By June 2005, the number of digital subscribers increase to 7.
8m, while it produced 38,375 hours of sport in 2005
In November 2005, in partnership with Vodafone, Sky Mobile TV was launched which was the UK's first commercially available mobile TV service.
Vodafone live! customers with 3G enabled handsets would receive the service.
Sky's direct-to-home satellite service became available in 10 million homes in 2010, Europe's first pay-TV platform in to achieve that milestone.
Confirming it had reached its target, the broadcaster said its reach into 36% of households in the UK represented an audience of more than 25m people.
The target was first announced in August 2004, since then an additional 2.
4m customers had subscribed to Sky's direct-to-home service.
Media commentators had debated whether the figure could be reached as the growth in subscriber numbers elsewhere in Europe flattened.
The Daily Mail newspaper reported in 2012 that the UK government's benefits agency was checking claimants' "Sky TV bills to establish if a woman in receipt of benefits as a single mother is wrongly claiming to be living alone" – as, it claimed, subscription to sports channels would betray a man's presence in the household.
 In December, the UK's parliament heard a claim that a subscription to Sky was ‘often damaging’, along with alcohol, tobacco and gambling.
Conservative MP Alec Shelbrooke was proposing the payments of benefits and tax credits on a "Welfare Cash Card", in the style of the American Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, that could be used to buy only "essentials".
In 2016, Sky launched its brand new TV and entertainment service called Sky Q.
On 1 March 2018, it was reported that Sky UK had concluded successful negotiations with Netflix to offer Sky subscribers with access to the international streaming service.
Comcast, the largest cable TV provider in the United States, outbid 21st Century Fox, on 22 September 2018 in an auction for control of Sky UK.
On 4 October 2018, Fox sold their stake to Comcast, giving the latter a 76.
8% controlling stake.
 On 12 October 2018, Comcast announced it will compulsorily acquire the rest of Sky after its bid gained acceptance from 95.
3% of the broadcaster's shareholders.
 Afterwards, Comcast acquired the remaining 5% of the shares of Sky.
Sky initially faced competition from the ONdigital digital terrestrial television service (later renamed ITV Digital).
ITV Digital failed for numerous reasons, including, but not limited to numerous administrative and technical failures, nervous investors after a large down-turn in the advertising market and the dot com crash, and Sky's aggressive marketing and domination of premium sporting rights.
While Sky had been excluded from being a part of the ONdigital consortium, thereby making them a competitor by default, Sky was able to join ITV Digital's free-to-air replacement, Freeview, in which it holds an equal stake with the BBC, ITV, Channel 4 and Arqiva.
Prior to October 2005, three Sky channels were available on this platform: Sky News, Sky Three, and Sky Sports News.
Initially, Sky provided Sky Travel to the service.
However, this was replaced by Sky Three on 31 October 2005, which was itself later re-branded as 'Pick TV' in 2011.
Sky initially faced increased competition from telecommunications providers to deliver pay television services over existing telephone lines using ADSL.
Such providers are able to offer "triple-play" or "quad-play" packages combining landline telephone, broadband Internet, mobile telephone and pay television services.
To compete with these providers, in October 2005, Sky bought the broadband Internet service provider Easynet for £211 million.
This acquisition allowed Sky to start offering a Sky-branded broadband service as well as a "triple play" package combining satellite television, land-line telephone and Broadband service.
Sky also offers some streaming live TV channels to a computer using Microsoft's Silverlight.
In early 2012, Sky released an update to its Sky Anytime service.
This update offers customers the chance to buy and rent films from the Sky Store.
On 26 September 2012, Sky relaunched its "Anytime+" on-demand-via-broadband service as "On Demand" as the BBC’s iPlayer joined the line-up of channels offering catch-up TV on the company's Sky+ HD box – linked to a router, the signal from which was recorded before viewing.
The BBC was making the preceding week's programmes available alongside ITV, Channel 4’s All 4, Channel 5 and the partly BBC Worldwide-owned UKTV, as well as Sky's own channels.
On 29 May 2009, it was confirmed that Sky Go would be made available on the Xbox 360.
 In November 2011 Sony Computer Entertainment struck a deal with Sky to bring some of its shows to the PlayStation Store Video Store.
Users are able buy individual TV episodes in SD or HD.
 On 3 December 2014, Sky Go became available on the PlayStation 4, followed by the PlayStation 3 on 29 January 2015.
[citation needed]
On 8 February 2007, Sky announced its intention to replace its three free-to-air digital terrestrial channels with four subscription channels.
It was proposed that these channels would offer a range of content from the Sky portfolio including sport (including English Premier League Football), films, entertainment and news.
 The announcement came a day after Setanta Sports confirmed that it would launch in March as a subscription service on the digital terrestrial platform, and on the same day that NTL's services re-branded as Virgin Media.
However, industry sources believe Sky will be forced to shelve plans to withdraw its channels from Freeview and replace them with subscription channels, due to possible lost advertising revenue.
On 1 March 2013, it was announced that Sky would buy O2's and Be's broadband services from Telefónica for £180 million up front plus another £20 million once customers have been transferred.
Telefónica said the deal would allow it to concentrate on providing better mobile services, including rolling out 4G.
Sky offers superfast broadband, Sky Fibre, using ADSL2+ technology and fibre-optic, which are provided by BT Openreach.
On 21 October 2016, it was announced that public pre-registration for Sky's new mobile network, Sky Mobile, would take place from 31 October 2016.
The network will operate as a Full MVNO, utilising the O2 radio access network infrastructure, and O2’s full network speeds and 4G+.
 On 5 January 2017 Sky Mobile went live to the public across the UK.
Coining itself as the Smarter Network, with tariffs mainly focused on data rather than traditional calls & text, effectively saving consumers money in wasted unused minutes and texts.
1GB data costs £10.
00 per month while 5GB costs £15.
00 per month with 10GB data costing £20.
00 per month.
With all those data tariffs, the customer can choose from two different call & text packages with the 'Pay as you use' costing 10p per minute of calls and 10p per text message sent or £10.
00 per month for Unlimited Calls & Texts.
The Unlimited Calls & Texts package is free for new or existing Sky TV customers using the Sky Mobile network.
As of 30 March 2017, Sky Mobile is offering handset deals.
Products are available from manufacturers such as Samsung, Sony, LG and Apple.
Sky launched with a set top box known as the Sky Digibox, using the Slogans "What do you want to watch?", "Entertainment your way" and the current slogan "Believe in Better".
 This was followed by Sky+, a digital video recorder with an internal hard drive which allows viewers to 'pause live television' (by switching from a live feed to a paused real-time recording that can be restarted at any point) and schedule programs to record in the future.
In later years the Sky+ box and then the Sky+ HD box replaced the original Digibox.
The first photos of a prototype Sky HD box began appearing in magazines in August 2005.
[citation needed] Sky launched HDTV services in May 2006.
All Sky+ HD boxes incorporate a version of Sky+ using a 300GB, 500GB, or 1TB hard drive (of which 160GB, 250GB or 500GB are available to the user) to accommodate the necessary extra data.
Sky initially charged an additional subscription fee for using a Sky+ PVR with their service; waiving the charge for subscribers whose package included two or more premium channels.
This changed as from 1 July 2007, and now customers that subscribe to any Sky package have Sky+ included at no extra charge.
Customers that do not subscribe to Sky's channels can still pay a monthly fee to enable Sky+ functions.
In September 2007, Sky launched a new TV advertising campaign targeting Sky+ at women.
As of 31 March 2008, Sky had 3,393,000 Sky+ users.
In January 2010 Sky discontinued the Sky+ Box, limited the standard Sky Box to Multiroom upgrade only and started to issue the Sky+ HD Box as standard, thus giving all new subscribers the functions of Sky+.
In February 2011 Sky discontinued the non-HD variant of its Multiroom box, offering a smaller version of the SkyHD box without Sky+ functionality.
 In September 2007, Sky launched a new TV advertising campaign targeting Sky+ at women.
As of 31 March 2008, Sky had 3,393,000 Sky+ users.
Sky launched its HDTV service, Sky+ HD, on 22 May 2006.
Prior to its launch, Sky claimed that 40,000 people had registered to receive the HD service.
In the week before the launch, rumours started to surface that Sky was having supply issues with its set top box (STB) from manufacturer Thomson.
On Thursday 18 May 2006, and continuing through the weekend before launch, people were reporting that Sky had either cancelled or rescheduled its installation.
Finally, the BBC reported that 17,000 customers had yet to receive the service due to failed deliveries.
 On 31 March 2012, Sky announced the total number of homes with Sky+ HD was 4,222,000.
In early 2012, Sky released an update to its Sky Anytime service.
This update offers customers the chance to buy and rent films from the Sky Store.
In June 2012, Sky launched a new EPG for Sky+ HD boxes.
The update included a new modernised look and improved functionality.
As of 1 October 2012, Sky Anytime was rebranded as Sky On Demand which included ITV Player and Demand 5.
BBC iPlayer followed in late Autumn with 4oD which changed to All 4 on 30 March 2015, launched in early 2013.
Sky began to broadcast programmes in 3D in April 2010.
This included new 3D channels, including a Sky Sports 3D and Sky Movies 3D.
Sky previously experimented with 3D broadcasting by broadcasting an Arsenal vs Manchester United football game live in 3D in nine pubs situated throughout the United Kingdom.
On 18 November 2015, Sky announced Sky Q, a range of products and services to be available in 2016.
 The Sky Q range consists of three set top boxes (Sky Q 1TB, Sky Q 2TB and Sky Q Mini), a broadband router (Sky Q Hub) and mobile applications.
The Sky Q set top boxes introduce a new user interface, Wi-Fi hotspot functionality, Power-line and Bluetooth connectivity and a new touch-sensitive remote control.
 The Sky Q Mini set top boxes connect to the Sky Q set top boxes with a Wi-Fi or Power-line connection rather than receive their own satellite feeds.
This allows all set top boxes in a household to share recordings and other media.
Sky Q became available to order on 9 February 2016 and is currently the only range available to new customers.
The Sky+ HD box was removed from sale on Sky's main website in October 2016.
 Sky Q has received highly positive reception.
The Sky Q 2TB set top box is capable of receiving and displaying 4K UHD broadcasts.
HDR will be added at a later date when HDR broadcast standards are agreed.
[citation needed] UHD broadcasts started on 13 August 2016, with the first live Premier League football match of the 2016/17 season, Hull vs Leicester City.
UHD broadcasts are available free of charge to Sky Q 2TB multiscreen customers with any other relevant subscriptions.
When Sky Digital was launched in 1998 the new service used the Astra 2A satellite which was located at the 28.
2°E orbital position, unlike the analogue service which was broadcast from 19.
2°E.
This was subsequently followed by more Astra satellites as well as Eutelsat's Eurobird 1 (now Eutelsat 33C) at 28.
5°E), enabled the company to launch a new all-digital service, Sky, with the potential to carry hundreds of television and radio channels.
 The old position was shared with broadcasters from several European countries, while the new position at 28.
5°E came to be used almost exclusively for channels that broadcast to the United Kingdom.
New Astra satellites joined the position in 2000 and 2001, and the number of channels available to customers increased accordingly.
This trend continued with the launch of Eurobird 1 (now Eutelsat 33C) in 2001.
Additionally, some channels occasionally received new numbering — However, in early 2006, the majority of channels received new numbering, with some receiving single digit changes, whilst others received new numbers entirely.
It was the country's most popular digital TV service until it was overtaken by Freeview in April 2007.
Prior to the migration to Astra 2E, 2F and 2G, Sky was transmitted from the Astra satellites located at 28.
2° east (2A/2C/2E/2F) and Eutelsat's Eutelsat 33C satellite at 28.
5°E.
As of 2019, Astra 2E, 2F and 2G are the sole satellites used by Sky UK; a number of services are served via narrow UK-only spot beams, the other services downlinked with a Europe-wide footprint.
UK-only spot beams are intentionally tightly focused over mainland UK, however they are still receivable dependent on location and access to a sufficiently large dish and sensitive LNB.
Eutelsat 33C was subsequently moved to 33° East, then moved again to 133° West and renamed as 'Eutelsat 133 West A' to serve transponders offering European and African language services.
Provided is a universal Ku band LNB (9.
75/10.
600 GHz) which is fitted at the end of the dish and pointed at the correct satellite constellation; most digital receivers will receive the free to air channels.
Some broadcasts are free-to-air and unencrypted, some are encrypted but do not require a monthly subscription (known as free-to-view), some are encrypted and require a monthly subscription, and some are pay-per-view services.
To view the encrypted content a VideoGuard UK equipped receiver (all of which are dedicated to the Sky service, and cannot be used to decrypt other services) needs to be used.
Unofficial CAMs are now available to view the service, although use of them breaks the user's contract with Sky and invalidates the user's rights to use the card.
Sky's standard definition broadcasts are in DVB-compliant MPEG-2, with the Sky Cinema and Sky Box Office channels including optional Dolby Digital soundtracks for recent films, although these are only accessible with a Sky+ box.
Sky+ HD material is broadcast using MPEG-4 and most of the HD material uses the DVB-S2 standard.
Interactive services and 7-day EPG use the proprietary OpenTV system, with set-top boxes including modems for a return path.
Sky News, amongst other channels, provides a pseudo-video on demand interactive service by broadcasting looping video streams.
Sky utilises the VideoGuard pay-TV scrambling system owned by NDS, a Cisco Systems company.
There are tight controls over use of VideoGuard decoders; they are not available as stand-alone DVB CAMs (conditional-access modules).
Sky has design authority over all digital satellite receivers capable of receiving their service.
The receivers, though designed and built by different manufacturers, must conform to the same user interface look-and-feel as all the others.
This extends to the Personal video recorder (PVR) offering (branded Sky+).
Sky maintains an electronic programme guide (EPG) which provides information about upcoming programmes and a list of channels.
TV channels available on Sky are assigned a three digit logical channel number which can be entered on a remote control to access the channel and determines in what order channels are listed.
Radio channels similarly receive a four digit EPG number (0 prefix + three digits).
The EPG differs depending on the viewer's location due to limited regional availability of certain channels or conditions relating to their must-carry status.
For example, this ensures that viewers get access to the correct BBC or ITV region or that S4C gets a prominent listing in Wales.
All channels are grouped into categories depending on their content.
What section of the EPG a channel gets allocated is determined by rules set up by Sky.
Sky has no veto over the presence of channels on their EPG, with open access being an enforced part of their operating licence from Ofcom.
Any channel which can get carriage on a suitable beam of a satellite at 28° East is entitled to access to Sky's EPG for a fee, ranging from £15–100,000.
Third-party channels which opt for encryption receive discounts ranging from reduced price to free EPG entries, free carriage on a Sky leased transponder, or actual payment for being carried.
However, even in this case, Sky does not carry any control over the channel's content or carriage issues such as picture quality.
In October 2007, Sky announced that they would not accept new applications to launch channel on their EPG, citing "very significant memory constraints" on many of its older digiboxes.
In June 2012, Sky launched a new EPG dubbed "Darwin" for their Sky+HD receivers, offering a more modern, refreshed interface and some improved functionality.
Newer SkyQ UHD receivers utilise different hardware, so run a different software stack.
The EPG numbering is altered frequently when new channels launch or receive new numbers.
A few times, the EPG has been substantially altered.
For example:
In early 2006, most channels received new numbering.
This shake-up intended to split up the original ten categories in sixteen.
For example, several channels that had been listed under the 'Entertainment' category where split off into a new 'Lifestyle & Culture' category while the 'News & Documentaries' category was split into two.
The 'Specialist' category, which had included shopping, dating, gambling, international and adult channels was split into several genres.
Following the integration of Living TV Group into Sky in early 2011, several prominent slots were freed up as many channels were closed down.
It was, reported Broadband TV News, the biggest reshuffle in EPG positions for over a decade, with MTV, Comedy Central, Universal Channel, Syfy, News Corporation's FX, and 40 HD channels moving to more prominent places.
Documentaries and other channels moving towards general entertainment programming and many other channel categories being overspilled into other parts of the EPG.
Sky reshuffled the channels again on 1 May 2018 which merged the documentaries and entertainment channels making many documentaries move to more prominent slots which had been occupied by time shift and standard definition channels which had been given their own areas in the 200s and 800s with the 800s being also filled with SD channels from other categories.
Virgin Media (re-branded in 2007 from NTL:Telewest) started to offer a high-definition television (HDTV) capable set top box, although from 30 November 2006 until 30 July 2009 it only carried one linear HD channel, BBC HD, after the conclusion of the ITV HD trial.
Virgin Media has claimed that other HD channels were "locked up" or otherwise withheld from their platform, although Virgin Media did in fact have an option to carry Channel 4 HD in the future.
 Nonetheless, the linear channels were not offered, Virgin Media instead concentrating on its Video On Demand service to carry a modest selection of HD content.
 Virgin Media has nevertheless made a number of statements over the years, suggesting that more linear HD channels are on the way.
In 2007, Sky and Virgin Media became involved in a dispute over the carriage of Sky channels on cable TV.
The failure to renew the existing carriage agreements negotiated with NTL and Telewest resulted in Virgin Media removing the basic channels from the network on 1 March 2007.
Virgin Media claimed that Sky had substantially increased the asking price for the channels, a claim which Sky denied, on the basis that their new deal offered "substantially more value" by including HD channels and Video On Demand content which was not previously carried by cable.
In response, Sky ran a number of TV, radio and print advertisements claiming that Virgin Media 'doubted the value' of the channels concerned, at first urging Virgin Media customers to call their cable operator to show their support for Sky, and later urging Virgin Media customers to migrate to Sky to continue receiving the channels.
The broadcasting regulator Ofcom subsequently found these commercials in breach of their code.
The availability (at an extra charge) of Sky's premium sport and movie services was not affected by the dispute, and Sky Sports 3 was offered as a replacement to Sky One on many Virgin Media packages.
This impasse continued for twenty-one months, with both companies initiating High Court proceedings.
 Amongst Virgin Media's claims to the court (denied by Sky) were that Sky had unfairly reduced the amount which it paid to VMTV for the carriage of Virgin Media's own channels on satellite.
Eventually, on 4 November 2008 it was announced that an agreement had been struck for Sky's basic channels – including Sky One, Sky Two, Sky Three, Sky News, Sky Sports News, Sky Arts 1, Sky Arts 2, Sky Real Lives and Sky Real Lives 2 to return to Virgin Media from 13 November 2008 until 12 June 2011.
In exchange, Sky would be provided continued carriage of Virgin Media Television's channels – Living, Livingit, Bravo, Bravo +1, Trouble, Challenge and Virgin1 for the same period.
The agreements include fixed annual carriage fees of £30m for the channels with both channel suppliers able to secure additional capped payments if their channels meet certain performance-related targets.
Currently there is no indication as to whether the new deal includes the additional Video On Demand and High Definition content which had previously been offered by Sky.
As part of the agreements, both Sky and Virgin Media agreed to terminate all High Court proceedings against each other relating to the carriage of their respective basic channels.
On 25 January 2017, Discovery Networks announced that they were in a dispute with Sky UK over the costs of payment fees to the broadcaster.
The broadcaster threatened to blackout their channels on the Sky platform, which includes Eurosport, Discovery Channel, TLC, Animal Planet, Investigation Discovery, DMAX, Discovery Turbo, Discovery Shed, Discovery Science, Discovery History and Home & Health, unless Sky accepted their request for fair pricing.
Sky indicated that they will not bow down, and the channels will likely become unavailable from 1 February 2017.
The same day, Discovery sent out a press release on the dispute and also blocked access to its own website with the news.
Discovery stated 'enough is enough' and claimed that Sky is paying less for its channels than it was ten years ago.
In that time, Discovery had stated that its viewing share has grown by more than 20%.
Managing Director Susanna Dinnage stated in the press release: "We believe Sky is using what we consider to be its dominant market position to further its own commercial interest over those of viewers and independent broadcasters.
The vitality of independent broadcasters like Discovery and plurality in TV is under threat.
"
In response, Sky stated that they had been "overpaying Discovery for years.
" It comes after Sky had paid £4.
2 billion on Premier League rights for the following three seasons.
The channel 'blackout' would have also affect the Sky owned NOW TV with the removal of Discovery Channel from both the live stream and On Demand service.
On 31 January 2017 at around 21:00, Sky UK revealed that they would continue to broadcast the Discovery Networks Channels by releasing the following statement: "Great news, we can confirm that Sky will continue to carry the Discovery and Eurosport channels.
This means you can still watch channels including: Animal Planet, Discovery HD, Discovery History, Discovery Home & Health, Discovery Science, Discovery Shed, Discovery Turbo, DMAX, Eurosport1, Eurosport2, Investigation Discovery, TLC and Quest.
" At the time of the statement release, it had not been revealed how much Sky UK had paid Discovery Networks.
In July 2013, the English High Court of Justice found that Microsoft’s use of the term "SkyDrive" infringed on Sky’s right to the "Sky" trademark.
On 31 July 2013, Sky and Microsoft announced their settlement, in which Microsoft will not appeal the ruling, and will rename its SkyDrive cloud storage service after an unspecified "reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transition to a new brand," plus "financial and other terms, the details of which are confidential".
 On 27 January 2014, Microsoft announced "that SkyDrive will soon become OneDrive" and "SkyDrive Pro" becomes "OneDrive for Business".
Hello Games was in legal negotiations with Sky over the trademark on the word "Sky" used for the title of their video game No Man's Sky for three years.
The issue was ultimately settled in June 2016, allowing Hello Games to continue to use the name.
Sky Limited is a British media and telecommunications conglomerate owned by Comcast and headquartered in London.
It has operations in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Italy and Spain.
Sky is Europe's largest media company and pay-TV broadcaster by revenue (as of 2018), with 23 million subscribers and more than 31,000 employees as of 2019.
 The company is primarily involved in satellite television.
Initially formed in 1990 by the equal merger of Sky Television and British Satellite Broadcasting, BSkyB became the UK's largest digital pay television company.
 In 2014, after completing the acquisition of Sky Italia and Sky Deutschland, the merged company changed its name to Sky plc.
Prior to November 2018, Rupert Murdoch's 21st Century Fox owned a 39.
14% controlling stake in the company; on 9 December 2016, following a previous attempt under News Corporation that was affected by the News International phone hacking scandal, 21st Century Fox announced that it had agreed to buy the remainder of Sky, pending government approval.
However, after a bidding war that included the Walt Disney Company (which was, in turn, acquiring most of 21st Century Fox assets), U.
S.
media and telecoms conglomerate Comcast acquired the entirety of Sky in 2018 for £17.
28 per-share.
Before the acquisition by Comcast, Sky was listed on the London Stock Exchange and was a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index and had a market capitalisation of approximately £18.
75 billion (€26.
76 billion) as of 2018.
Foundation
British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB) was formed by the merger of Sky Television and British Satellite Broadcasting on 2 November 1990.
 Both companies had begun to struggle financially and were suffering financial losses as they competed against each other for viewers.
The Guardian later characterised the merger as "effectively a takeover by News Corporation".
The merger was investigated by Office of Fair Trading and was cleared a month later since many of the represented views were more concerned about contractual arrangements which had nothing to do with competition.
 The Independent Broadcasting Authority was not consulted about the deal; after approval, the IBA demanded precise details about the merger, stated they were considering the repercussions of the deal to ultimately determine whether BSB contracts were null and void.
 On 17 November, the IBA decided to terminate BSB's contract, but not immediately, as it was deemed unfair to 120,000 viewers who had bought BSB devices.
Sam Chisholm was appointed CEO in a bid to reorganise the new company, which, continued to make losses of £10 million per week.
The defunct BSB's HQ, Marco Polo House were sold, 39% of the new company's employees were made redundant to leave just under 1000 employees, many of the new senior BSkyB executive roles were given to Sky personnel with many BSB leaving the company.
In April the nine Sky/BSB channels had been condensed into five, with EuroSport being dropped soon after the Sky Sports launch.
 Chisholm also renegotiated the merged company's expensive deals with the Hollywood studios, slashing the minimum guaranteed payments.
The defunct Marcopolo I satellite was sold in December 1993 to Sweden's NSAB, and Marcopolo II went to Norway's Telenor in July 1992 after the ITC was unable to find new companies to take over the BSB licences and compete with BSkyB.
News International received 50%, Pearson PLC 17.
5%, Chargeurs 17.
5%, Granada 12%, Reed International 2% of the new shares in the company.
By September 1991, the weekly losses had been reduced to £1.
5M a week, Rupert Murdoch said "there were strong financial marketing and political reason[s] for making the compromise merger instead of letting BSB die.
Many of the lessons had been learnt with more than half the running cost of the combined company".
Further cuts in losses were a direct result of 313,000 new customers joining during the first half of 1991.
 By March 1992, BSkyB posted its first operating profits, of £100,000 per week, with £3.
8 million weekly from subscriptions and £1 million from advertising, but continued to be burdened with £1.
28 billion of debt.
James Capel forecast BSkyB would still be indebted in 2000.
In the autumn of 1991, talks were held for the broadcast rights for Premier League for a five-year period, from the 1992 season.
 ITV were the current rights holders for the Football League, and fought hard to gain the new rights.
ITV had increased its offer from £18m to £34m per year to obtain the new rights.
 BSkyB joined forces with the BBC to make a counter bid.
The BBC was given the highlights of most of the matches, while BSkyB paying £304m for the Premier League rights, would give them a monopoly of all live matches, up to 60 per year from the 1992–93 season.
 Murdoch has described sport as a "battering ram" for pay-television, providing a strong customer base.
 A few weeks after the deal, ITV went to the High court to get an injunction as it believed their details were leaked before the decision was taken.
ITV also asked the Office of Fair Trading to also investigate since it believed Rupert Murdoch's media empire via the newspapers had influence the deal.
 A few days later neither action took effect, ITV believed BSkyB was telephoned and informed of its £262m bid, and Premier League advised BSkyB to increase its counter bid.
BSkyB retained the rights paying £670m for the 1997–2001 deal, but was challenged by On Digital for the rights from 2001–2004, thus it was forced to pay £1.
1 billion which gave it 66 live games a year.
Following a lengthy legal battle with the European Commission, which deemed the exclusivity of the rights to be against the interests of competition and the consumer, BSkyB's monopoly came to an end from the 2007–08 season.
In May 2006, the Irish broadcaster Setanta Sports was awarded two of the six Premiership packages that the English FA offered to broadcasters.
Sky picked up the remaining four for £1.
3bn.
In October 1994, BSkyB announced its plans to float the company on the UK and US stock exchanges, selling off 20% of the company.
 The stock flotation reduced Murdoch's holding to 40 percent and raised £900m, which allowed the company to cut its debt in half.
Sam Chisholm said "By any standards this is an excellent result, in every area of the company has performed strongly".
 Chisholm, became one of the world's most highly paid television executives.
In 1995, BSkyB opened its second customer management centre at Dunfermline, Scotland, in addition to its original centre at Livingston which opened in 1989.
BSkyB entered the FTSE 100 index, operation profits increased to £155M a year, and Pearson sold off its 17.
5% stake in the company.
Sam Chisholm resigned from BSkyB due to a rift with Rupert Murdoch.
 A week later, Murdoch was quoted as saying "I cannot understand the fuss; BSkyB was grossly overpriced", which caused further rifts with the new management.
In 1997, BSkyB formed a partnership with Carlton and Granada to bid for the right for the new digital terrestrial network.
In June, it was awarded the right to start the service, ONdigital under the condition BSkyB withdrew from the group's bid.
In February 2003 BSkyB wished to renegotiate its deal with MTV to reduce its payment from £20m.
Chief executive Tony Ball said "We're definitely prepared to stare them down if we can't get a sensible deal, MTV, and other channels, have done particularly well out of the growth of Sky but the opportunity for savings is now there and Sky will be taking it," he added.
"MTV has done extremely well out of that original deal.
" On 17 April 2003 BSkyB launched its own range of music channels Scuzz, Flaunt and The Amp, as part of its plan to create its own original channels for the platform.
 Within 18 months the channels failed to make impact, and were outsourced to the Chart Show Channels company.
Shortly afterwards it acquired Artsworld, giving a majority of subscribers full access to the channel.
The buyout was part of James Murdoch's strategy to improve the perceptions BSkyB which could lead to potential new subscribers.
John Cassy, the channel manager of Artsworld, said: "It is great news for the arts that a dedicated cultural channel will be available to millions of households.
"
In early 2007 Freeview overtook Sky Digital with nearly 200,000 more subscribers at the end of 2006, while cable broadcaster Virgin Media had three million customers.
On 4 June 2010, BSkyB and Virgin Media announced that they had reached agreement for the acquisition by BSkyB of Virgin Media Television.
Virgin1 was also a part of the deal and was rebranded as Channel One on 3 September 2010, as the Virgin name was not licensed to Sky.
 The new carriage deals are understood to be for up to nine years.
On 29 June 2010, The Competition Authority in Ireland cleared the proposed transaction.
On 20 July 2010, The Office of Fair Trading announced that they would review BSkyB's acquisition of the Virgin Media Television business to judge whether it posed any competition concerns in the UK.
 The OFT planned to investigate the deal to see whether it could constitute a qualifying merger under the Enterprise Act 2002.
The watchdog invited interested parties from the industry to comment on the sale, including its potential impact on the pay-TV market.
On 14 September 2010, the OFT decided not to refer BSkyB's takeover of Virgin Media's TV channels to the Competition Commission.
In June 2010, News Corporation made a bid for complete ownership of BSkyB.
However, following the News International phone hacking scandal, critics and politicians began to question the appropriateness of the proposed takeover.
The resulting reaction forced News Corp.
to withdraw its bid for the company in July 2011.
 The scandal forced the resignation of James Murdoch, who was the chairman of both BSkyB and News International, from his executive positions in the UK, with Nicholas Ferguson taking over as Chairman of BSkyB.
In September 2012, Ofcom ruled that BSkyB was still fit to hold broadcast licenses in the UK, but criticised James Murdoch's handling of the scandal.
On 28 June 2013, News Corporation was split into two publicly-traded companies; the company's publishing operations (including News International, renamed News UK) and broadcasting operations in Australia were spun into a new company known as News Corp, while the company's broadcast media assets, including its 39.
14% stake in Sky, were renamed 21st Century Fox.
On 12 May 2014, BSkyB confirmed that it was in talks with its largest shareholder, 21st Century Fox, about acquiring 21st Century Fox's 57.
4% stake in Sky Deutschland and its 100% stake in Sky Italia.
The enlarged company (dubbed "Sky Europe" in the media) will consolidate 21st Century Fox's European digital TV assets into one company.
 The £4.
9 billion takeover deal was formally announced on 25 July, where BSkyB would acquire 21st Century Fox's stakes in Sky Deutschland and Sky Italia.
BSkyB also made a required takeover offer to Sky Deutschland's minority shareholders, resulting in BSkyB acquiring 89.
71% of Sky Deutschland's share capital.
The acquisitions were completed on 13 November.
 British Sky Broadcasting Group plc changed its name to Sky plc to reflect the European acquisitions, and the United Kingdom operations were renamed Sky UK Limited.
Sky plc bought out the remaining minority shareholders in Sky Deutschland during 2015, using a squeeze-out procedure to obtain the remaining shares and delist Sky Deutschland on 15 September 2015.
On 9 December 2016, 21st Century Fox announced that it had made an offer to acquire the remainder of Sky plc for £11.
7 billion at a value of £10.
75 per-share.
It marked Fox's second attempt to take over Sky, as its previous attempt under News Corporation was affected by the News International scandal.
The two companies reached an agreement on the deal on 15 December, subject to regulatory approval.
Ofcom expressed concern that this purchase would give the Murdoch family "material influence over news providers with a significant presence across all key platforms" and "increased influence over the UK news agenda and the political process".
However, the regulator did deem that a Fox-owned Sky would be "fit and proper" to hold broadcast licences, despite the recent sexual harassment controversies that had emerged at the U.
S.
Fox News Channel, as there was no evidence to the contrary.
 Avaaz opposed Ofcom's opinion, stating that the regulator "made mistake after mistake in deciding to give the Murdochs a clean bill of health to take over more of our media".
The Walt Disney Company announced on 14 December 2017, that it would acquire 21st Century Fox, including its stake in Sky plc but barring specific U.
S.
assets.
Fox stated that this purchase would "not alter [its] full commitment and obligation to conclude our proposed transaction".
Analysts suggested that Disney's proposed transaction could ease regulatory concerns over Fox's purchase of Sky, as the company will eventually lose its ties to the Murdoch family.
Disney has a narrower scope of media ownership in the country than the Murdoch family.
 Sky already has a relationship with Disney for its Sky Cinema service, holding pay television rights to its films in the United Kingdom and operating a dedicated Sky Cinema channel devoted to Disney content.
A preliminary report by the Competition and Markets Authority issued January 2018 called for the insulation or outright divestment of Sky News as a condition of the purchase, so that it is editorially independent from the Murdoch family.
 Sky had threatened to reevaluate the channel's continued operations if they "unduly impeded merger and/or other corporate opportunities available in relation to Sky's broader business".
The channel has operated on a loss of at least £40 million per-year.
 In February 2018, Fox proposed the establishment of an independent editorial board, and committing to fund the network for at least 10 years.
This commitment would be inherited by Disney after the completion of its purchase of 21st Century Fox.
 On 3 April 2018, Fox stated that Disney had "expressed an interest in acquiring Sky News", which would not be conditional on its proposal to acquire 21st Century Fox.
A bidding war began 25 April 2018, when the competing U.
S.
media and telecoms conglomerate Comcast (owner of NBCUniversal), announced a counter-offer for Sky at £12.
50 per-share, or approximately £22.
1 billion.
 NBCUniversal CEO Steve Burke stated that purchasing Sky would roughly double its presence in English-speaking markets, and allow for synergies between the respective networks and studios of NBCUniversal and Sky.
On 5 June 2018, Culture Secretary Matt Hancock cleared both 21st Century Fox and Comcast's respective offers to acquire Sky plc.
Fox's offer was contingent on the divestiture of Sky News.
 On 12 June 2018, Comcast announced a US$65 billion counter-offer to acquire the 21st Century Fox assets that Disney had offered to purchase.
 However, Fox subsequently agreed to an increased, US$71.
3 billion offer from Disney instead.
 On 15 June 2018, the European Commission gave antitrust clearance to Comcast's offer to purchase Sky, citing that in terms of their current assets in Europe, there would be limited impact on competition.
Comcast included a 10-year commitment to the operations and funding of Sky News similar to that of Disney's offer.
 On 19 June 2018, Disney formally agreed to acquire Sky News as part of Fox's proposed bid, with a 15-year commitment to increase its annual funding from £90 million to £100 million.
On 11 July 2018, Fox increased its bid for Sky to £14.
00 per-share, valuing it at £24.
5 billion.
Comcast subsequently counterbid just hours later with an offer at £14.
75 per-share, valued at £26 billion.
 On 19 July 2018, after Fox agreed to a Disney counter-offer, it was reported that Comcast had abandoned its bid for 21st Century Fox to focus solely on Sky.
On 20 September 2018, the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers ordered that a blind auction be held "in order to provide an orderly framework for the resolution of this competitive situation".
In this process, Fox, followed by Comcast, made new cash-only bids for Sky.
After these first two rounds of bidding, there would be a third round where both companies could make new offers.
However, the third round of bidding would only be binding if both companies make a bid.
The results were to be revealed on 22 September, and be confirmed by the start of trading on 24 September.
 Comcast won the auction with a bid of £17.
28 per-share, beating Fox's bid of £15.
67.
 Sky plc had until 11 October to formally accept this offer.
Following its auction victory, Comcast began to acquire Sky shares from the open market.
On 26 September 2018, Fox subsequently announced its intent to sell all of its shares in Sky plc to Comcast for £12 billion.
 On 4 October 2018, Fox completed the sale of their shares, giving Comcast a 76.
8% controlling stake at the time.
 On 12 October 2018, Comcast announced it will compulsorily acquire the rest of Sky after its bid gained acceptances from 95.
3% of the broadcaster's shareholders.
 Sky was delisted on 7 November 2018 after Comcast acquired all remaining shares.
The first CEO of BSkyB was Sam Chisholm, who was CEO of Sky TV before the merger.
Chisholm served in this position until 1997.
He was followed by Mark Booth who was credited with leading the company through the introduction of Sky.
Tony Ball was appointed in 1999 and completed the company's analogue to digital conversion.
He is also credited with returning the company to profit and bringing subscriber numbers to new heights.
In 2003, Ball announced his resignation and James Murdoch, son of Rupert Murdoch was announced as his successor.
This appointment caused allegations of nepotism from shareholders.
On 7 December 2007, it was announced that Rupert Murdoch would be stepping down as BSkyB's non-executive chairman and would be replaced by his son, James.
In turn, James stepped down as CEO of BSkyB, to be replaced by Jeremy Darroch.
The current company directors are Comcast personnel; Michael J Cavanagh (Comcast Senior VP & CFO), Arthur R Block (Legal Counsel) and David L Cohen (Senior VP & CDO).
On 12 July 2011, former British Prime Minister, Gordon Brown, claimed that BSkyB's majority owner, News Corporation, attempted to affect government policy with regard to the BBC in pursuit of BSkyB's own commercial interests.
 He went further, in a speech in Parliament on 13 July 2011, stating:
"Mr James Murdoch, which included his cold assertion that profit not standards was what mattered in the media, underpinned an ever more aggressive News International and BSkyB agenda under his and Mrs Brooks’ leadership that was brutal in its simplicity.
Their aim was to cut the BBC licence fee, to force BBC online to charge for its content, for the BBC to sell off its commercial activities, to open up more national sporting events to bids from BSkyB and move them away from the BBC, to open up the cable and satellite infrastructure market, and to reduce the power of their regulator, Ofcom.
I rejected those policies.
" 
As a result of the furore over phone hacking – including all main parties in the UK Parliament agreeing on a motion to block the bid and the deal being referred to the Competition Commission – the News Corporation takeover proposal for BSkyB was dropped on 13 July 2011.
In light of the phone hacking revelations, the UK media regulator Ofcom took the decision on 8 July 2011 to be kept informed of the phone hacking investigation and to launch a "fit and proper" test, as a result of BSkyB's majority News Corp ownership (part of its obligations under the UK Broadcasting Act), in order to remain "satisfied that any person (which will include controlling directors and shareholders) holding a broadcasting licence remains fit and proper to hold those licences.
"
On 20 September 2012, BSkyB was found "fit and proper" to retain a licence to broadcast by the British Office of Communications (Ofcom).
Ofcom stated in its report that "Ofcom’s duty to be satisfied that a licensee is fit and proper is ongoing.
Should further relevant evidence become available in the future, Ofcom would need to consider that evidence in order to fulfill its duty.
" 
As part of News Corporation – which has a large ownership of the UK newspaper market – BSkyB was highlighted as part of media ownership concerns in September 2010 by Claire Enders, founder of media consultancy Enders Analysis, when she wrote to Vince Cable, UK Business Secretary, in a 20-page letter stating that News Corporation's bid for the 60.
9% of BSkyB they don't own would dilute media plurality and exercise "too much political influence".
 She also stated any such shareholder arrangement would represent a ""Berlusconi moment" for the UK", referring to Italy's concentration of media ownership.
This was followed by the same argument from the Financial Times in an editorial, who stated "a merger would give Mr Murdoch unfettered power to direct its management and cash flows" and that, consequently, this would "lock out challengers and stifle the diversity of debate.
" Lord Puttnam also argued the same thing, referring to the Coalition Government's desire to alter broadcast regulation and its links with News Corporation.
Pressure group 38 Degrees began a petition to Vince Cable, arguing that News Corporation (and Murdoch's) proposed shareholding would stifle a "free and diverse UK media" and affect UK broadcasting impartiality rules.
 Global campaigning organisation, Avaaz, also opposed the deal, with hundreds of thousands of its members signing petitions targeting the UK government.
Although the bid was "dropped after only five weeks" some media commentators presumed it had been done to "bide time" and that News Corp were "still confident" they could prove their bid was not "a serious threat to competition".
In October 2010, a group of media companies – accounting for a third of Fleet Street and the BBC – jointly wrote to Vince Cable, the Business Secretary, to lay out their reasons for the BSkyB share bid being a breach of media plurality.
 The BBC's contribution to the letter was subsequently attacked in a (News International owned) Times editorial.
Ofcom complained that Sky's plan to operate pay TV services on Freeview was "generating serious consumer detriment" and the National Consumer Council call Sky's plan "bad news for consumers," combined with representations from BT, Setanta, Top Up TV, and Virgin Media caused Ofcom to launch an investigation into the "features of the [UK pay TV] market, including control over content, ownership of distribution platforms, retail subscriber bases and vertical integration.
"
Sky repeatedly used its lawyers to lodge complaints with the soon-to-be-rival YouView service, considered by some to be a delaying tactic in order to promote its own services, especially considering its failure to complain about other services, such as Google TV.
On 13 July 2011, MP Chris Bryant stated to the House of Commons, in the Parliamentary Debate on the Rupert Murdoch and News Corporation Bid for BSkyB that the company was anti-competitive:
"The company has lots of technological innovation that only a robust entrepreneur could to bring to British society, but it has also often been profoundly anti-competitive.
I believe that the bundling of channels so as to increase the profit and make it impossible for others to participate in the market is anti-competitive.
I believe that the way in which the application programming interface—the operating system—has been used has been anti-competitive and that Sky has deliberately set about selling set-top boxes elsewhere, outside areas where they have proper rights.
If one visits a flat in Spain where a British person lives, one finds that they mysteriously manage to have a Sky box there even though it is registered to a house in the United Kingdom.
"
On 4 August 2010, Ofcom asked the Competition Commission to investigate concerns regarding the sale and distribution of subscription premium Pay TV films.
 Ofcom was concerned in particular that the way in which these films are sold and distributed created a situation in which Sky had the incentive and ability to distort competition.
The end result for consumers is less choice, less innovation and higher prices.
Ofcom couldn't address these concerns fully using its powers and referred them to the Competition Commission.
The referral related to two specific films markets.
The first concerned the rights to films sold by the major Hollywood studios to broadcast films for the first time on pay TV.
And the second concerned the wholesale supply of pay TV packages containing films channels, which are based on those rights.
The Competition Commission had a maximum of two years to investigate and reach a decision on the concerns raised by Ofcom.
On 8 February 2011, a working paper published on the Competition Commission website, entitled "Profitability of Sky", said Sky is making "excessive profits" from its Sky Movies service.
 The media regulator was particularly concerned that Sky's near exclusive control over first-run films from the six major Hollywood studios has given the firm an "incentive and ability to distort competition".
The Competition Commission's preliminary findings published over the summer found that Sky has a case to answer.
 The commission found that the prices at which Sky wholesales its film channels to other broadcasters is too high, Sky's contracts with the six major Hollywood studios mean no rival operators can afford to risk bidding for them and that Sky prevented BT and Virgin Media from developing a business selling films on demand via subscription by warehousing – or buying without using – the exclusive right to let viewers watch films on demand via subscription.
In a provisional decision published on 19 August 2011, the Competition Commission said BSkyB's contracts with the six major Hollywood studios present a significant barrier to entry to potential competitors and that prices charged by Sky are too high.
 The commission said the adverse effect on competition caused by Sky's film domination meant that consumers were paying £50m to £60m a year more than would otherwise be the case.
Among a number of recommendations from the Competition Commission, the regulator said Sky should be restricted from signing exclusivity deals with all of the major Hollywood film studios for film rights in the so-called "first subscription pay-television window", exclusivity deals with the film giants should be weakened so rival operators can buy the rights to other distribution methods and competitors would be able to rival Sky Movies by offering their own selection of new releases.
In March 2012, the commission signalled a change of heart after deciding it needed to extend the investigation to take into account the impact of Netflix launching a UK-subscription VoD movie service in January and the move by LoveFilm to extend its rental-by-post model to offer a similar online service to customers.
 On 20 April 2012, Ofcom told the Competition Commission to stick to its guns and break Sky's hold on the pay-TV film market, arguing that the arrival of Netflix and LoveFilm had not altered the broadcaster's dominance.
On 23 May 2012, the Competition Commission revised its provisional findings indicating that video on demand rivals such as LoveFilm and Netflix provide a vibrant market for consumers and that BSkyB should face no action from regulators over its monopoly of UK pay-TV film rights.
 While the regulator dropped any proposal to act against BSkyB, it said that competition in the overall pay-TV retail market was ineffective.
However, the Competition Commission said it could not act on this as the scope of the investigation was limited to the first subscription pay-TV window only.
On 2 August, the Competition Commission filed its final report, upholding its revised assessment.
 The decision marked the first time that the Competition Commission had reversed its initial decision in a market investigation.
Sport
On 31 March 2010, Ofcom ordered BSkyB to cut the price of its premium sport channels.
 Sky must offer Sky Sport 1 and 2 to rival operators at 23.
4% below its own monthly price per subscriber.
The wholesale price for service bundles was also to be reduced by 10.
5%.
Sky must also offer the high definition versions of Sky Sports 1 and 2 to rivals, but Ofcom will not set the prices after accepting that HD is a relatively new innovation.
Instead, Sky must make the channels available on "fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory terms".
Ofcom also asked the Competition Commission to address concerns regarding the sale and distribution of subscription video-on-demand premium movie rights.
British Sky Broadcasting immediately confirmed its intention to challenge Ofcom’s conclusions before the Competition Appeal Tribunal.
On 29 April 2010, BSkyB reached an interim agreement with Ofcom to offer its flagship sports channels at a lower wholesale cost to BT Vision, Top Up TV and Virgin Media.
 The agreement between Sky and Ofcom results in the three named Sky competitors having access to Sky Sports 1 and 2 at an Ofcom-mandated "wholesale must-offer" price for carriage on digital terrestrial and cable.
However, while the interim agreement is in effect, the three named competitors will effectively continue to pay the existing rate card price, with the difference between that and the wholesale must-offer price paid into escrow.
On 9 November 2010, the agreement was extended to include Real Digital, subject to Real agreeing contractual terms with BSkyB.
 On 1 July 2010, BT revealed plans to undercut Sky's own prices by £10 a month.
Sky immediately said it would raise its own prices by £3 a month from 1 September, driving up the wholesale cost to BT and potentially forcing it to provide the channels at a loss.
 Sky had attempted to block Top Up TV from distributing Sky Sports 1 and 2 via a conditional-access module but was forced to allow access by Ofcom on 15 December 2010.
On 13 December 2010, Ofcom opened an investigation to consider a complaint submitted by Virgin Media in relation to the terms of wholesale supply by Sky to Virgin of Sky Sports 1 and Sky Sports 2 HD, namely that it is calculated on a per-device basis.
On 24 February 2011, Ofcom issued a Draft Decision to the parties and Virgin withdrew its complaint on 16 March 2011, Ofcom therefore closed the case.
 On 13 December 2010, Ofcom also opened an investigation to consider a complaint submitted by BT against Sky concerning the requirement on BT to provide Sky with information on BT Visions total number of pay subscribers and total number of customers.
On 29 March 2011, Ofcom concluded its assessment of BT's complaint, issuing a decision to give a direction to Sky in respect of compliance with Condition 14A of each of the Television Licensable Content Service licences for Sky Sports 1 and Sky Sports 2.
The direction states that a clause in Sky's agreement for the wholesale supply of Sky Sports 1 and Sky Sports 2 to BT, requiring BT to provide Sky with BT Vision's total number of pay subscribers and total number of customers is in breach of Condition 14A(1)(d) and required that clause to be removed forthwith.
On 8 August 2012, the Competition Appeal Tribunal ruled that Ofcom's core competition concern about the way BSkyB sold its sports channels wholesale to competitors was "unfounded", namely that BSkyB had deliberately withheld wholesale supply of its premium channels from other retailers, preferring to be entirely absent and that in doing so had been acting on strategic incentives unrelated to normal commercial considerations of revenue/profit maximisation.
However, BSkyB was unable to convince the tribunal that Ofcom misinterpreted its powers when it ordered a reduction in wholesale prices for Sky Sports 1 and 2.
Despite these restrictions, Sky's £1 billion budget and the collapse of Setanta Sports in 2009, left it best-placed to buy any sport not considered a free-to-air "crown jewel".
BSkyB's EPG charges
According to former ITV Director of Programmes and Pearson PLC Chief Executive, Greg Dyke, an investigation by the Independent Television Commission in the early 1990s, regarding BSkyB's control of its EPG (and threats to alter the BBC's listing if it ever broadcast unencrypted) discovered "something that would have been deeply embarrassing to BSkyB if it became public".
 The EPG dispute was subsequently settled by BSkyB "before the ITC adjudication on our [BBC] dispute was published.
"
Rapture TV lodged complaints with both the Competition Commission and Ofcom concerning Sky charging free-to-air channels for the benefits of "Pay TV" listings on its EPG, despite separate carriage networks being used and free-to-air channels gaining no Pay TV benefit.
This included the criticism that Sky charges all digital broadcasters a fee to subsidise their set top boxes, which according to EU Directive 98/94 should only cover boxes which are offered to non-Sky subscribers and Pay TV subscribers on the same terms (which was disputed by Rapture TV).
This concern was highlighted by the BBC Director General, Mark Thompson, in the 2010 James MacTaggart Media Guardian Edinburgh International Television Festival, when he stated "Sky pays nothing for re-transmitting the PSB channels, despite the fact that taken together, they are by far the most watched channels they offer.
On the contrary, the PSBs pay an EPG charge for the privilege of being on the satellite platform.
"
Tax avoidance
As part of Newscorp Investments, a British holding company, BSkyB was part of a group which avoided tax over the decade up to 1999.
British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB) (LSE: BSY) is a company that operates Sky Digital, a subscription television service in the UK and Ireland.
It produces TV content, and owns several TV channels.
It is the UK's largest pay TV provider.
More than a third of the equity is owned by News Corporation, an American company chaired by Rupert Murdoch; News Corporation's precise shareholding fluctuates due to share options and buy backs and was 39.
1% at May 2009.
As of 30 September 2008 it had 9,067,000 direct to home customers in the UK and Ireland.
As of February 2007, it also had 3,294,000 indirect customers through the cable operator Virgin Media & through IPTV operator TalkTalk TV in the UK, and a further 604,000 indirect cable customers on UPC Ireland in Ireland.
It is listed on the London Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index.
The Astra satellite network began with the launch of Astra 1A in 1989.
With the launch of more Astra satellites from 1991 onward BSkyB was able to begin expanding its services (the Astra satellites were all orbitally co-located at 19.
2° east so that they could be received using the same dish).
Sky does not own any of the satellites it has used since withdrawing service from the Marcopolo craft; the Astra satellites are owned and operated by SES Astra (and Eurobird 1 by Eutelsat).
Sky has shared its orbital position with other pay-TV systems in the past.
Sky has also worked together with Tata Group bringing Tata Sky in India and substituary states.
By 1990 both Rupert Murdoch's Sky Television and the BSB alliance were beginning to struggle with the burden of massive losses which led to a 50:50 financial merger in November 1990.
The new company was called British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB) but marketed as Sky, Marco Polo House was sold, BSB's channels were largely scrapped in favour of Sky's and the Marcopolo satellites were run down and eventually sold in favour of the Astra system (Marcopolo I in December 1993 to NSAB of Sweden and Marcopolo II in July 1992 to Telenor of Norway.
Both companies had already one HS376 in orbit at the time).
The merger may have saved Sky financially; Sky had very few major advertisers to begin with.
Acquiring BSB's healthier advertising contracts and equipment apparently solved the company's problems.
The launch of the Astra 2A satellite at a new orbital position, 28.
2° east, in 1998 (subsequently followed by more Astra satellites as well as Eutelsat's Eurobird 1 at 28.
5°E), enabled the company to launch a new all-digital service, Sky Digital, with the potential to carry hundreds of television and radio channels.
Rupert Murdoch's News International (a wholly owned subsidiary of News Corporation) currently has a 38% stake in the company.
News Corp also fully owns Sky Italia, about 78% of New Zealand's SKY Network Television Limited and b.
net of Croatia and Montenegro.
The first CEO of BSkyB was Sam Chisholm, who was CEO of Sky TV before the merger.
Chisholm served in this position until 1997.
He was followed by Mark Booth who was credited with leading the company through the introduction of Sky Digital.
Tony Ball was appointed in 1999 and completed the company's analogue to digital conversion.
He is also credited with returning the company to profit and bringing subscriber numbers to new heights.
In 2003 Ball announced his resignation and James Murdoch, son of Rupert Murdoch was announced as his successor.
This appointment caused allegations of nepotism from shareholders.
On 7 December 2007 it was announced that Rupert Murdoch would be stepping down as BSkyB's Non-Executive Chairman and would be replaced by his son, James.
It was also announced that James would be stepping down as CEO of BSkyB and will be replaced by Jeremy Darroch.
1989 5 February — Sky television launches DTH UK service via Astra satellite
1990 — Sky subscribers reach 1 million
1990 November — British Sky Broadcasting formed by merger of Sky Television and British Satellite Broadcasting (BSB).
Murdoch the majority shareholder through News International, BSB partners' Pearson, Reed, Chargeurs and Granada plc shareholdings were held through BSB Holdings Limited (BSBH)
1991 — Of BSB's five channels; Now news programmes merged with Sky News and Sky Arts created to use Now programming, Galaxy merged with Sky One, The Sports Channel is rebranded to Sky Sports soon after the merger, and launches on Astra.
This followed Sky's forced closure of its earlier venture Eurosport due to EU competition concerns.
(The channel was later purchased by TF1 and relaunched.
) The Movie Channel is retained and also launches on Astra.
The Power Station remains broadcasting on Marcopolo until April.
Sky One, Sky News and Sky Movies maintained.
1992 July — BSkyB sells the former BSB Marcopolo II satellite to Telenor
1992 — BSkyB signs exclusive live television rights deal with the FA Premier League
1992 31 December — BSkyB ceases transmissions to Marcopolo I satellite following the IBA's withdrawal of the BSB franchise.
Despite re-advertising the franchise, and attracting a number of expressions of interest, the franchise was not re-awarded, and UK DBS trasmissions from 31 degrees west ended, effectively making Astra 1 the UK's default satellite position.
1993 1 September — "Sky Multichannel" packages launched
1993 — December — BSkyB sells the former BSB Marcopolo I satellite to NSAB
1994 — 17% of BSkyB is floated on the London and New York stock exchanges
1994 — Five more channels launch, including Sky Sports 2
1995 — Six more channels launched including History Channel and Disney Channel
1995 — BSkyB enter the FTSE 100 Index
1996 — BSkyB signs an extension of its Premier League rights for £670 million
1998 30 August — First of a new generation of Astra satellites launched, paving way for digital satellite television.
Sky Digital launches on 1 October
1999 — Vivendi SA becomes sole shareholder of BSBH, which held 11.
8% of BSkyB at the time.
It also acquired the shareholding of Pathé through merger, bringing its total shareholding to 22% (as of 2001).
BSkyB Chairman Jérôme Seydoux forced to resign due to sale of Pathé's interest; Murdoch takes Chairmanship to prevent Vivendi acquiring it (as it would be entitled to)
2001 — BSkyB signs 5 millionth subscriber.
Analogue service discontinued
2001 — Sky+ introduced: A set top box/digital video recorder hybrid
2001 — December — Vivendi Universal sells part of its shareholding comprising 8% of the company, followed by the remaining 14% in May 2002
2002 — BSkyB takes an equal share of Freeview, in partnership with the BBC and Crown Castle (now part of National Grid)
2003 — James Murdoch elected as CEO, replacing Tony Ball
2003 — Sky subscribers reach 7.
5 million
2003 — Sky acquires the television series 24 from Fox which was previously shown on the BBC
2004 1 November - ITV plc takes full control of GSkyB.
Plus, one of GSB's channels, was closed down and replaced with ITV3.
2005 — BSkyB purchase network provider Easynet for £211m ($373.
1m).
2005 — Sky launches Sky by Broadband, a service available to existing movie and sports service subscribers that allows them to download movies and sports clips direct to their home computer.
The service is made available free of charge
2006 — Sky HD launches on 22 May, with a line-up of 10 high definition channels
2006 — Sky acquires Mykindaplace.
com to expand its internet presence
2006 — Sky acquires Aura Sports Ltd to expand its internet media sales presence
2006 — Sky achieves CarbonNeutral status
2006 — Sky launches and allows pre-registering of its new broadband service
2006 — Sky is listed as one of the applicants for the licence to manage Ireland's digital terrestrial television network
2006 — Sky acquires Season 3 and 4 of Lost in a multi-million pound deal with Buena Vista International Television (previous series were shown on Channel 4)
2006 — Sky controversially acquires 17.
9% stake in ITV, Britain's largest free-to-air commercial broadcaster, blocking NTL's proposal.
2006 — Sky rebrands VoD services, such as Sky By Broadband, as Sky Anytime, adding US imports to on-demand content.
2007 — Sky announces plans to launch pay channels on the digital terrestrial platform.
2007 — Secretary of State for Trade and Industry Alistair Darling asks media regulator Ofcom to investigate Sky's purchase of a stake in ITV plc.
2007 — Sky's increased price demands causes Virgin Media to not renew the contract to provide Sky basic channels (effective from 1 March 2007) after negotiations falls through.
2007 — BSkyB acquire electronics manufacturer Amstrad for a reported £133 million.
2007 29 October — Sky Broadband reach 1 million customer mark.
2007 29 October — BSkyB offer to give up part of their ITV voting rights after a ruling from the Competition Commission.
2008 10 November — BSkyB announces that they will offer online TV.
Satellite TV channels to be broadcast over the internet.
No satellite receiver needed.
2009 17 February — BSkyB announces that they will be replacing over 90,000 Sky+HD boxes due to a technical fault.
Boxes will be replaced for free and customers will receive three months of HD services, free of charge.
BSkyB have never confirmed the official reason for the recall, however have stated that the recall was not due to a safety issue.
2009 19 October — Sky unveils the Sky Songsmusic subscription service.
For £6.
49/month users can download 10 mp3s, and get unlimited streaming of over 4 million tracks.
For £7.
49/month, users get an additional 5 mp3s/month (a total of 15 tracks per month) plus the streaming service.
2010 26 January - BSkyB announces it expects to receive £200m damages from HP-EDS after winning a court case against HP-EDS over a 2,000 contract to build a customer relationship management system.
HP-EDS said it would appeal the verdict .
2010 28 January — Sky reveals that Sky 3D will broadcast in April.
Sky also standardised the Sky+HD box to become the only box they sell, and the announced the release of a 1 terabyte Sky HD box with the capacity to record up 240 hours of HD programming.
British Sky Broadcasting Ltd
Operating company for the Sky pay-television service.
Sky Television Ltd
The original Sky Television plc, now a holding company
Sports Internet Group Ltd
Sports content and online betting services.
British Interactive Broadcasting Holdings Ltd
Interactive television services, formerly an alliance of BSkyB, BT Group, HSBC and Matsushita.
Easynet Ltd
Network infrastructure for Sky Broadband, Easynet connect, UK Online, and third party corporate customers.
Mykindaplace.
com
Being both an agency and a media owner, run many successful sites.
Aura Sports Ltd
Media Sales Agency, sells advertising on the majority of premiership football club websites, as well as other major sports.
Aura Play Ltd
Another Media Sales Agency, sells advertising across a number of websites in the music and entertainment sector.
Sky Ireland
Operating company for Sky pay-television service in the Republic of Ireland.
The main headquarters are in Osterley, London.
Sky originated material is uplinked to the satellite from BSB's original earth station at Chilworth, outside Southampton (and from the BT owned Madley Communications Centre and London Teleport earthstations).
The largest concentration of Sky staff in the UK is in Scotland; the main areas being in Livingston and Dunfermline.
There is also Uddingston.
These house Sky's contact centres as well as the IT departments, Finance departments and Field Operations.
Other contact centres are in Yorkshire, Lancashire and Glasgow.
There is also a contact centre dedicated to customer upgrades in Cardiff, though this is outsourced to Conduit.
The Ofcom Consumer Panel complained that the BSkyB plan to operate pay TV services on Freeview was "generating serious consumer detriment" and the National Consumer Council call the BSkyB plan "bad news for consumers," combined with representations from BT, Setanta, Top Up TV, and Virgin Media has caused Ofcom to launch an investigation into the "features of the [UK pay TV] market, including control over content, ownership of distribution platforms, retail subscriber bases and vertical integration.
"
At present the other major pay-TV operator in the United Kingdom is the service provider Virgin Media (Rebranded in 2007 from NTL:Telewest).
Virgin Media's cable network was also formed by numerous mergers and acquisitions over the last decade, with different cable companies having used different types of network and technology in their areas.
Virgin Media currently includes Virgin Media Television, previously the content arm of Telewest known as Flextech Television, which owns several channels, including the Sky1's direct rival Virgin1 and a 50% stake in the UKTV network.
Virgin is understood to be seeking to sell this business, and as at May 29, 2009, BSkyB is understood to have made the largest bid at auction.
Like Sky, Virgin Media offers a high-definition television (HDTV) capable set top box, although from 30 November 2006 until 30 July 2009 it only carried one linear HD channel, BBC HD, after the conclusion of the ITV HD trial.
Virgin has claimed that other HD channels were "locked up" or otherwise withheld from their platform, although Virgin did in fact have an option to carry Channel 4 HD in the future.
Nonetheless, the linear channels were not offered, Virgin instead concentrating on its Video On Demand service to carry a modest selection of HD content.
Virgin has nevertheless made a number of statements over the years, suggesting that more linear HD channels are on the way.
In Q3 2009 Virgin announced that it was making more linear HD channels available on its platform, including FX HD, MTVN HD, Channel 4 HD, and National Geographic HD.
Also expected to follow shortly is Living HD.
In 2007, BSkyB and Virgin Media became involved in a dispute over the carriage of Sky channels on cable TV.
The failure to renew the existing carriage agreements negotiated with NTL and Telewest resulted in Virgin removing the basic channels from the network on 1 March 2007.
Virgin claimed that Sky had substantially increased the asking price for the channels, a claim which Sky denied, on the basis that their new deal offered "substantially more value" by including HD channels and Video On Demand content which was not previously carried by cable.
In response, Sky ran a number of TV, radio and print advertisements claiming that Virgin media 'doubted the value' of the channels concerned, at first urging Virgin customers to call their cable operator to show their support for Sky, but later urging Virgin customers to migrate to Sky to continue receiving the channels.
The broadcasting regulator Ofcom subsequently found these commercials in breach of their code.
The availability (at an extra charge) of Sky's premium sport and movie services was not effected by the dispute.
This impasse continued for twenty-one months, with both companies initiating High Court proceedings.
Amongst Virgin's claims to the court (denied by Sky) were that Sky had unfairly reduced the amount which it paid to VMTV for the carriage of Virgin's own channels on satellite.
Eventually, on 4 November 2008 it was announced that an agreement had been struck for Sky's Basic channels – including Sky1, Sky2, Sky3, Sky News, Sky Sports News, Sky Arts 1, Sky Arts 2, Sky Real Lives and Sky Real Lives 2 to return to Virgin Media from 13 November 2008 until 12 June 2011.
In exchange will be provided continued carriage of Virgin Media Television's channels – Living, Livingit, Bravo, Bravo +1, Trouble, Challenge and Virgin1 for the same period.
The agreements include fixed annual carriage fees of £30m for the channels with both channel suppliers able to secure additional capped payments if their channels meet certain performance-related targets.
Currently there is no indication as to whether the new deal includes the additional Video On Demand and High Definition content which had previously been offered by Sky.
As part of the agreements, both Sky and Virgin Media agreed to terminate all High Court proceedings against each other relating to the carriage of their respective basic channels.
Sky is facing increased competition from telecommunications providers delivering pay television services over existing telephone lines using ADSL.
Such providers are potentially able to offer "triple-play" or "quad-play" packages combining land-line telephone, broadband Internet, mobile telephone and pay television services.
In the final quarter of 2006, BT, the UK's biggest Telephone company, launched BT Vision.
The BT Vision set-top box, provides true Video on Demand (VoD) over BT's telephone lines using ADSL.
The set-top-box complements the VoD component by providing access to the Freeview digital terrestrial television service.
TalkTalk TV also offers an IPTV service with many channels, including Sky's channels, delivered to a set top box over ADSL.
To compete with these providers, in October 2005, BSkyB bought the broadband Internet Service Provider Easynet for £211 million.
This acquisition has allowed BSkyB to start offering its "Sky Anytime on PC" service as well as a "triple play" package combining satellite television, land-line telephone and Broadband service.
Sky also offers some streaming live TV channels to a computer using Microsoft's Silverlight.
BSkyB initially faced competition from the ONdigital digital terrestrial television service (later renamed ITV Digital).
ITV Digital failed for numerous reasons, including, but not limited to numerous administrative and technical failures, nervous investors after a large down-turn in the advertising market and the dot com crash, and BSkyB's aggressive marketing and domination of premium sporting rights.
Sky was more receptive to ITV Digital's free-to-air replacement, Freeview, in which it holds an equal stake with the BBC, ITV, Channel 4 and National Grid Wireless.
Prior to October 2005, three BSkyB channels were available on this platform: Sky News, Sky Three, and Sky Sports News.
Initially BSkyB provided Sky Travel to the service.
However, this was replaced by Sky Three on 31 October 2005, allowing BSkyB to air its exclusive licensed content with delays of between 12–18 months from their original air dates on Sky One.
Terrestrial television companies currently have limited bandwidth.
This means that, at present, there is little or no option to offer HD services, until after the final analogue television services are switched off in 2012 freeing up substantial bandwidth.
In a response to the push towards Free to Air services such as Freesat and Freeview, BSkyB has marketed its own free to view offering (Freesat from Sky).
On 8 February 2007, Sky announced its intention to replace its three free-to-air digital terrestrial channels with four subscription channels.
It was proposed that these channels would offer a range of content from the Sky portfolio including sport (including English Premiership Football), movies, entertainment and news.
The announcement came a day after Setanta Sports confirmed that it would launch in March as a subscription service on the digital terrestrial platform, and on the same day that NTL's services rebranded as Virgin Media.
However, industry sources believe Sky will be forced to shelve plans to withdraw its channels from Freeview and replace them with subscription channels, due to possible lost advertising revenue.
ITV plc has been the subject of a flurry of rumoured take-over and merger bids since it was formed.
For example, on 9 November 2006, NTL announced that it had approached ITV plc about a proposed merger .
The merger was effectively blocked by BSkyB on 17 November 2006 when it controversially bought a 17.
9% stake in ITV plc for £940 million , a move that attracted anger from NTL shareholder Richard Branson and an investigation from media and telecoms regulator Ofcom.
On 6 December 2006, NTL announced that it had complained to the Office of Fair Trading about BSkyB's move.
NTL stated that it had withdrawn its attempt to buy ITV plc, citing that it did not believe that there was any possibility to make a deal on favourable terms.
At the same time as the NTL bid, RTL, the owner of Five, was also rumoured to be preparing a bid for ITV plc, with the possibility of a stock-swap with BSkyB.
The plan would see RTL acquiring BSkyB's stake in ITV plc (with the aim of further acquisitions of shares in the future) in exchange for BSkyB taking full control of Five.
However, no move from RTL has yet materialised so far.
Sky has developed a new version of its Sky Guide electronic programme guide (EPG) service, which includes new genres, easier access to channels, and a complete renumbering system.
It also includes new hotkeys to get into new menus quicker.
This is the biggest change to the Sky EPG since its launch in 1998.
Sky Anytime is the current brand for Sky's on-demand services currently available on TV (Sky+ and Sky+ HD), XBOX 360 and 3G mobile phones.
Sky Anytime on PC has been rebranded to Sky Player
BSkyB launched its HDTV service, Sky+ HD, on 22 May 2006.
Leading up to the launch, Sky claimed that 40,000 people had signed up to the HD service.
However, in the week before the launch rumours started to surface that Sky was having supply problems of its Set Top Box (STB) from manufacturer Thomson.
Starting on Thursday 18 May, and then all through the weekend before launch, people were reporting that Sky had either cancelled or rescheduled its installations.
Finally, the BBC reported that 17,000 customers had been let down for the launch due to failed deliveries.
Some customers reported installations were only cancelled on the day of the launch.
The episode was widely seen as being very embarrassing for Sky, who until that point had been extremely conservative in new service launch schedules.
The supply problems were resolved shortly after launch.
According to figures published by Sky, there were 591,000 subscribers to the Sky HD service by 30 September 2008.
BSkyB's purchase of broadcast rights for major sporting events, most importantly Premiership football, has been the bedrock of its success.
The company paid over £300 million for the Premier League rights, beating the BBC and ITV, and has had a monopoly of live matches since the inception of the Premier League in 1992.
Murdoch has described sport as a "battering ram" for pay-television, providing a strong customer base.
However, following a lengthy legal battle with the European Commission, which deemed the exclusivity of the rights to be against the interests of competition and the consumer, BSkyB's monopoly came to an end from the 2007–08 season.
In May 2006 the Irish broadcaster Setanta Sports was awarded two of the six Premiership packages that the English FA offered to broadcasters.
Sky picked up the remaining four for £1.
3 billion.
BT offer a pay per view service of selected Premier League matches through their BT Vision service, and Virgin Media offer free highlights on the Virgin Media website.
In September 2008, BT announced that it is thinking of bidding for live Premier League matches when the bidding starts in January 2009.
Sky utilizes the VideoGuard pay-TV scrambling system owned by NDS, a News Corporation subsidiary.
There are tight controls over use of VideoGuard decoders; they are not available as stand-alone DVB CAMs (Conditional Access Modules).
BSkyB has design authority over all digital satellite receivers capable of receiving their service.
The receivers, though designed and built by different manufacturers, must conform to the same user interface look-and-feel as all the others.
This extends to the Personal video recorder (PVR) offering (branded Sky+).
BSkyB initially charged additional subscription fees for using a Sky+ PVR with their service; waiving the charge for subscribers whose package included two or more premium channels.
This changed as from 1 July 2007, and now customers that have Sky+ and subscribe to any Sky subscription package get Sky+ included at no extra charge.
Customers that don't subscribe to Sky's channels can still pay a monthly fee to enable Sky+ functions.
In September 2007, Sky launched a new TV advertising campaign targeting Sky+ at women.
As of 31 March 2008 Sky have 3,393,000 Sky+ users.
On 29 May 2009 it was confirmed that Sky Player would be made available via Microsoft's Xbox 360 games console.
Included is live streaming of various television channels, on-demand movies and live sports programming.
This was a worldwide first for Microsoft, and only available in the UK and Ireland.
Sky subscribers in the Republic of Ireland have a more restricted choice of channels compared to Northern Ireland or Great Britain subscribers.
The standard Irish channels RTÉ One, RTÉ Two, TV3, TG4 and 3e are available to all Irish subscribers and unavailable by any other means on Satellite.
However only BBC One Northern Ireland, BBC Two Northern Ireland and Channel 4 are available to Irish Sky subscribers.
Free to air channels like the ITV family of channels, BBC Three, BBC Four, BBC News, BBC HD and Five can only be tuned via the Other Channels section.
As these channels are only available via the Other Channels section it is not possible for Irish Sky+ or Sky HD subscribers to record programmes from these channels onto their boxes.
Sky pays the BBC for the right to include BBC One and BBC Two NI on the Irish EPG.
[citation needed] Northern Ireland subscribers in some packages get RTÉ One, RTÉ Two and TG4, though occasional programs may be blacked out.